<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TEI>
 <teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
   <titleStmt>
    <title>
     Gertrude
    </title>
    <author>
     Hermann Hesse
    </author>
    <year>
     1910
    </year>
    <genre>
     Novel
    </genre>
    <originalrlanguage>
     German
    </originalrlanguage>
    <source>
     https://www.holybooks.com/wp-content/uploads/Gertrude-By-Hermann-Hesse.pdf
    </source>
    <originalfileformat>
     PDF
    </originalfileformat>
   </titleStmt>
  </fileDesc>
 </teiHeader>
 <text>
  <body>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter one
    </head>
    <p>
     JOHN BUCKLE PRINTERS LIMITED
Theatre Plain Great Yannoutli Norfolk





When I consider my life objectively, it does not seem
particularly happy. Yet I cannot really call it unhappy,
despite all my ntistakes. After all, it is quite foolish to
talk. about happiness and unhappiness, for it seems to
me that I would not exchange the unhappiest days of my
life fbr all the happy ones.

When a person has arrived at a sta in life when he
accepts the inevitable with equanimity, when he has
tasted ftOOd and bad to the full, and has carved out for
hin .. ell :ilc.ngside his external hfe, an inner, more real
and not f01 tuitous existence. then it seems my life has
not  empty and worthless. Even if my xternal
    </p>
    <p>
     destiny has unfolded itself as it does with everyone,
inevitably rd as decreed by the gods, my inner life has
been my own work, with its joys and bitterness, and I,
alone, hold myself respon1ible for it.

At dmes, when I was younger, I wanted to be a poet.
If I were, I would not resist the temptation of tracing
back my life into the dim shadows of my childhood and
to the fondly preserved sources of my earliest memories:
But the posse.sion is far too precious and holy for me
to sf&gt;il in any way. All I will say about my childhood
is that it was good and happy. I was giten the freedom
to discover my own inclinations and talents, to create
my inmost pleasures and sorrows myself and to regard
the uture as the hope and produa. of my own streugth
and not as something fas,hioned by a strange power from
above. So I passed unnoticed through the schools as an
orinary, little tklented, but qniet scholar who was finally
left aone, as I did not seem to be subjected to ,any strong
influences.
    </p>
    <p>
     When I was about six or seven years old, I realised that
among all invisible powers, I was destined to be most
strongly affected and doriiinated by music. From that
time I had my own world, my sanctuan and my heaven
that no-one could take away from me or belittle, and that
I did not wish to share with anyone. I was a musician
although I did not learn to plav anr instrument liefore
my twelfth year and did not think that 1 would later
wish to earn my living by music.

That i how matters have been ever since, without
anything being essentially changed, and that is why on
looking back on my life it does not seem varied and
many-sided, but from the beginning it has been tuned to
one key-note and l:lirected solely to one star. Whether
things went well or badly with me, my inner life remained
unchanged. I might sail for long periods across foreign
seas, not touching a manuscript-book or an instrument,
and yet at every moment there would be a melody in
    </p>
    <p>
     my l&gt;lood and on my lips, a bet and rhythm in the
drawing of breath and life. However eagerly I sought
salvation, oblivion and deliverance in many other way.
however much I thirsted for God, understanding and
peace, I always found them in muic alone. It dio not
need to be Beethoven or Bach: it has been a continual
consolation to me and a justification for all life that there
is music in the world, that one can at times be deeply movpi by rhythms \nd pervaded by harmonies. , Oh,
music I A melody occurs to you; you sing it silently,
inwardly only; you steep your being ln it; it takes ses­
sion of all your strength Ind emotions,-and during the
time it lives in you, it effaces all. that is fortuitou!, e;il,
coarsr an&lt;fsad in you; it brings the world intd harmony
with you, it makes burdens light and gives wings to the
benumbed! The melody of a folk-song can do all that.
And first of all the harmony! tor each pleasing harmony
of clearly combirw&lt;l notes, perhaps in one chord, charms
and delights the spirit, and the feeling is intensified with
each additional note; it can at times fill the heart with
joy Jftld make it tlCIIlble with l&gt;liss as no other sensual
    </p>
    <p>
     pleasure can do.

Of all the conceptions of pure bliss that peope and
poets have dreamt about, it seemed to me that the one
of Ji  e1.:,1g to the harmony of thc spheres was the highest
and most intu1se. That is where my dearest and brightest
dreams have ranged-to hear for the duration of a heart­
beat the universe and the totality of life in its mysterious,
innat&lt;' ha"' ,011y. Alas! how is it that life can be so
confusing and out of tune and false, how can there be
lies, evil, envy and bate amongst people, when the
shortc:st song and most simple piece of music preach
that heaven is revealed in the purity, harmony and close
play of clearly sounded notci, ! And how can I upbraid
people and grow angry whel\ I, myself, with all the good
will in the world have not been able to make a song and
any iweet music out of my life! Inwardly, I am really
aware of an imperative urge, of a thirsting desire for one
pur. pleasiTig, essentially holv sound and its,fading away,
but my days are full of mischance and discord and wh&amp;ever I turn and wherever I slrike, there is ner a
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter two
    </head>
    <p>
     true and clear echo.

But no more; I will tel\ you the story. When I consider
fof whom I am covering thhe pages and who has, in
fact, \0 uch power over me that she can draw a con­
fession &amp;om me and penetrate my loneliness, I , must
give the name of a beloved woman, who is not only
bounti to me by a large slice of experience and detiny,
but who also stands abov everything for me like a tar
and acred symbol.




It was only during my last year or two at r.chool when
all my school-fellows were belinning to talk about their
future careers t1Nit I also began to think about mine.
The possibflity of making music my profession and means
of livelihood was really far removed from my thoughts;
yet 1 could rot taink of any other career that would
    </p>
    <p>
     make me happy. I had no objection to commerce or
other professions suggested by my father; I just felt
indifferent towards them. Perhaps it was because my
tollc:.tut'&gt; wre 'lO proud of the r.areers of their choice
that an inwa1u voice also told me that it was good and
right to 'make a career of that which filled my thqughts
and alone gavr P\e real pleasure. It proved useful that I
had learned ·"' play tbe violin since I was twelve and
had made some progress under a good teacher. The
more my father resisted and worried at the thought of
his only son embarking upon the uncertain career of an
artist, the stronger grew my will in the face of his opposi­
tion, and the teacher, who liked me, strongly supported
my wish. In the end, my father sbbmitted, but just to
test my endurance and in the hope that I would change
my Jnind, he required me to stay on another year at
sc.hool. I endured this with rrasonablc patience and ._ . h_. . d . b e1urmg t II ume my esare ttame even stronger.

During the last year at school I fell in love for the
fint time with a pretty young girl who was in our circle
    </p>
    <p>
     of friends. Without seeing her often and also without
strongly desiring her, I su'ffered and enjoyed the emotions
of first love as in a dream. l&gt;uring this period when I
w thinking about my music as much as about my
f \  bloved and could not sleep at nights through .great
excittment, I consciously retained for the first time
melodies which occurred to me. They were two short
songs and I tried to write t.'nem down. This made me feel
bashful but gave me acute pleasure, aq,d I almost forgot
my youthful pangs of love. Meantime, I learned that m'
beloved took singing lessons and I was very eabrer to hear
her sing. After some months my wish was fulfilled al an
evening gathering at my parents' house. Tne pretty girl
was asked to sing. She resisted strongly but finally had to
give in and I waited with great excitement. A gentleman
accompanied her on our humble little piano; he played
a few bars and she began. Oh, she sang badly, very badly,
and while she was still singing, my dismay and torment
changed into sympathy then into humour, and from then
on I was free from this love.
    </p>
    <p>
     I was patient and not altogether indolent, but I was
not a good schlar, and during my last year at ,chool I
made very little effort. This was not due to la1iness and
my infatuation, but to a state of youthful day-dreaming
and indifference, a dullness of sem,cs and intellect that
was only now and then suddenly and powully pierttd
when one of the wonderful hours of premature creative
desire enveloped me like ether. I then felt a'i if I 't'ere
surrounded by a rarified, crystal-clear atmosphere im
which dreainng and vegetating were not ible 1an:t
where all my senses were sharpened and on the alert.
Little was produca, during those hours, perhaps ten
melodies and the beginnings of harmony, but I will never
forget the rarified almost cold ·atmosphere of. that time
and the intense concentration required 1.0 give a ntelody
the correct emotion and' interpretation and not just \he
rough co1'ception o it. I was not satisfied -witlT these
small results and did not consider them to be of any
great value, but it was clear 10 me that there would never
    </p>
    <p>
     be anything as desirable and important in my life as the
return of such hours of clarity and creativeness.

At the same uine I also had periods of day-dreaming
when I improvised on the violin and enjoyed the intoxi­
catien of fleeting i,npressions and exalted moods. I soon
knew that tltis was not creativeness but ju11t playing and
running riot, against which I had to guard. I also realised
that it was one thing to indulge in day-dreaming and
in'.ux;._.-.ting hours and another to wrestle strenuously and
resolutely \\ 1th the secrets of form as if with fiends. I also
partly realised at that time that true crcatiye power
isolates one and de111and'i s&lt;&gt;mething that ha., to be sub­
tracted fr m the enjoyment of life.

At last I was free. My school-days were behind me. I
had said good-bye to my parents and had begun a new
life as a student at the School of Music in the capital. I
commenced this new phase with great expectations and
was convinced that I would be a good scholar at the
    </p>
    <p>
     Sc.hool of usic. However. this did not pro,e to be the
"ase. I ha difficulty in following the instruction in all
dir·tions. found the piano lessons which' I now had to
tak! only a gr&lt;'at trial, and I M&gt;&lt;&gt;n saw my whole course
t&gt;f\tudy !Icing me-like an unscalable mq_umain. I did
not think of gi\ ing in, but I was disilJusioned and dis-
concerted. I now saw that with ah. my modesty I had
conaidered myself some kind of a genius and had c.-onuder­
ably underestimated the toils and di8icultiea encountered
along' the path &amp;o an art. Maa-eovei, my composing was
seriously affected for I now only saw mountains of diffi­
culuea' and rules in the smalle.t exercise. I learned to
mistrust my sensibilities entirely and no longer knew
whether I possessed any talent. So I became resigned,
humble and sad. I did my work very much as 1 would
have done in an office or in another sfhere, diligently
but without pleasure. 1 did not dare complain, least of
all in the lerten that I sent home, but continued in
secret disillusionment along the path .' had commenced
and hoped to become at least a good violinilL. I practised
    </p>
    <p>
     continually and bore hard words and sarcasm ftom the
teachers. l saw man others whom I would not have
believed capable of it, make progress easily and receive
praise, and my goal became even rnore humble. For
even with the violin things were not going so well that
I could feel proud and perhaps think. of becoming a
virtuoso. If I worked hard, it looked a'I if I might at
least become a proficient violinist who could pla a
modest part in some small orchestra, without digracc
and without honour, and earn my living by it.

this period for which I had yearned so much and
which had promised everything to me, was the only one
in my life when I travelled along joyless paths abandoned
hy the spirit of music and lived through days which had
no meaning and rhythm. Where I had looked for pleaure,
exaltation, radiance and beauty, 1 found only demahd11,
rules, difficul\ies, tasks and trials. If a m-1.asical ilica
occurred to me, it was either banal and imitative, or it
was apparently in contradiction with all the laws of
    </p>
    <p>
     music and had no value. So I said farewell to all my
great hopes. I was one of thousaod1 .who had apprQached
the art with youthful con\dence and ose powen ltad
fallen short of his aspiration

This state of aR'ain lasted about three yean. I was
now over twenty C.trs old. I had apparently failed in
my vocation and only continued along the path I had
commenced out of a feelinitof 'ihame and duty. I did
not know anyth;.pg more about music, only about finger­
exercises, difticult tasks, contradictions in the study of
harmon, and tedious piano le,;.,ons from a sarcastic
teac'ber who1onlyaw a waste of time in all my efforts.

If the old ideal had not .,ecretly been alive in me, I
could have enjoyed mysel£ during those ,ear11. I was free
and had £riend11. I was a good-Jooking and health, young
m.,n, the -.on of wealthy parents. I-or 'lhort periods I
enjoyed .1.ll that; there were plea\ant days, ftirtation'i,
carousing and holida\1,. But it Wlb not po1111ible for me
    </p>
    <p>
     to console-ln,-,elf in thi'i way, to la, :t\ide my obligations
for ., sho1 L time ,md above all to enjoy my ,outh. With­
out rcall knowing it, in ungu.1.rded hours I still loo1.ed
longingly at the fallen star of &lt;.reative art, and it was
impo.,'i1blc for me to forget and 11tifte m, feelings of
di1illu1,ionmc11t. Onh onc.e l\,lS I reallv succes11ful in
doing so.

It was the mo'it fooli.,h d.t of m\ foolish ,outh. I wa1
then pur11uing a girl-student stud,ing under the famou11
,inng te.ic.her H. Both 'lhe and I were in a similar
icameit: i,he had anhed with great hopes, had
tound strict teacher'!, wo1. .. unu\Cd to the wdt'1., and finalh
even thought 11he w.1., going to lo'IC her ,oice She had a
·
light nature, flirted with her colleagues and knew how
to infuriate us. She had the vivacious, gaudy type of
beauty tha\ soon fades.

This pretty gilt called Liddy continually captivated me
    </p>
    <p>
     with = ir,genuous coquetry whenever I waw her. I was
never in love with her for long. Often I &lt;"ompletely
forgot her, but whenever I was with her, my infatuation
for her returned. She plaved with mt· ai, she did with
others, enticing me and enfoying her pow«-r, but she was
only indulging in the i-eni,ual curiosity cl her youth. She
was very pr · .v, but onlv when she ,poke and moved,
when she laughed with her deep warm voke, wht'n she
danced or was ammed at the je.ilous! of er admil-en.
\Vhenever I returned home from a party where I h.id
seen her, I uhed to laugh at m,..elf and realio,e that it wafl
impossible for a pcr11011 of my nature to be .eriousl in
love with this pleasant, light-hearted girl. Somctima,
however, with a gesture or a friendlv whispered word, she
was so successful in exdting me, that for half the nip;ht I
would loiter with 'ardent feelings near the house where
she lived.

I was then going through a pha\C of wildness and
half-enforced bravado. After da of depression and
    </p>
    <p>
     dullness, my OUth demanded storm emotion,; and exc.ite­
men"t and I went with some other companions of nn own
age in search of divenion. We pa11,ed for jolJy, unruly,
even dangerous rioten, whkh was untrue of me, and we
enjoyed a doubtful but plea111ant hcrok rc.-putation with
Liddy and her ,;mall circle. I low ru..in of these Jrges
could be attributc.-d to genuine OUthfulnc\'i, and t\n":
many were a ct.:sire tor forgetfulne\\, I cannot now decide,
for I have long ago completel outgrown those phases
14
and all extreme youthfulness. If I indulged"in exc:e11e1,
I have since atoned for them.

One winter's day when we were free, we 1'ent pn an
excursion to the outskirts f the town. 'there were ht
or ten yo'!ng people, amongst them Liddy and th$ee girl
friends. We had toboggans with us, the u of which
was still a source of childish pleasure to us, and we
looked for good slides in the hilly distric.ts outside the
town, on the roads and on the slopes of fields. I remember
    </p>
    <p>
     that day very w,:11. It was extremely cold;' at times the
sun would appear for about a quarter of an hour and
there was a wonderful smell of snow in the strong air.
The girls lk.ed tlovely in their bright clothes against
the white tiackground; the sharp air was intoxicating
and the energetic exercise in the fresh air was delightful.
0111 !:1le party was in very high spirits; there was much
familiaril ·nd chaffing which was ano;wered with snow­
balls.and led to i,hort battles until we were all hot and
cm·ered with snow. Then we had to stop a · while to
recover o t  eath before we began agam. A large snow­
castle wJ., built and besieged and ever 110 often we
tobogganned down the slopes of fields.

At mid-day, when \\e were all extremely hungry as a
result of our exercise, we looked for and found a village
with a good inn; we cooled down, took po&lt;ssession of the
piano, sang, shouted, and ordered wine and- Food
was brought and enjoyed enormom,ly, and there was
good wine in abundance. Afterwards the girls asked for
    </p>
    <p>
     colfc while we had liqueurs. There was such an uproar
injhe lite room that we were entirely confused. I was
with Liddy all the timt. who, in a graci"'1s mood, had
chosen me for special favour that day. She was at her
l!'i
best in this atmosphere of merrymaking and noiae; her
lovely eyes sparkled and ahe permitted many half-bold,
half-qmid endearments. A mr lf forfeits was com
mcpced in whidl the forfeiters were released after imita­
tin qpe of our teachers at the piano. but 1uany also
through kisses, the number aaad quality of which were
closely obseIVed.

When we left the inn and set off home, in high spirits
and with much noiiie. it "1,s still early afternoon but it
was already growing a little dark.  again romped
through the mow like care-free children. returning to
town without haste in the gradually approaching eveping.
I managed to remc1in by Liddy's sir!e a appointed
myself her companion, not without opposition from the
    </p>
    <p>
     others. I drew her on to my toboggan and protected her
to the best of my ability against the renewed attack" with
snow balls. Finall, we were left alone; each girl found
a male companion, and two ,oung men who were surplus
joined forces with much c.haffing and mock belligeren&lt;e.
I had never been '10 excited an&lt;l madly in love as I was
at that time. Lidd had taken my arm and allowed me
to dr-aw her close to me a&lt;1 we movrd along. She w,1s
soon chattering awa; then r,he became silent and, it
appeared to me, c.ontent to be at my side. I felt very
ardent and was determined to make the most of th1r,
opportunity and at least maintc1in thi'i friendly, delight
fµl state of affairs ai. long ai. posible.

No-one lad am objection when I 'iuggesteci another
detour shortl before rec1ching the lown ,md \\e tu\ned
on to a lovely road that ran high c1bove thr valle,-i9'
a semi-circle,rich in extensive vit.'Ws mer the valley,
river and town which, in the distnce, was c1lready aglow
16
    </p>
    <p>
     with rowa of bright lamps and thousands of re&gt;1y lights.

Liddy 1till hung on to my arm and let me talk, received
my ardent advances with amusement .and yet seemed very
excited herself. But when1 tried to dr2W her gently to
me and kiss her, she freed herself and moved away.

"Look,',. she cried, taking a deep breath, "w: must
toboggan down that field I Or are you afraid, my hero?"
I looked down and was astonished for the slope was
so steep that for the moment.9 I was really afraid at the
thought of such J1 dangerous ride.

"Oh, no," I said quietly, "it is already far too dark.."
She immediately began to mock and provoke me, called
me \ coward ande said she would ride down the slope
alone if I w!s too faint-hearted to wme with her.

"We hall overturn, of cour," she said laughing, "but
that '"' 1hr most amusing part of tobogganing."
    </p>
    <p>
     As he prnvoked me so much, I h:ul an idea.
"Li.ddy," I said softl·, "we'll go. If we o,·erturn, you
can rub snow over me, but if we c9111$! down all right,
then I war. 11,y reward."

She jus. ,aughed and st down on the toboggan. I
looked at her face; it was bright and sparkling. I took.
my place in the front, told her to hold tightly on to me
and ·we set off. I felt her clasp me and cross her hands
on my chest. I wanted to shout o,omething across to her
but I could no longer do so The slope was so steep that
I felt as if we were hurtling through the air. I immediateiy
tried to put both feet on the ground in order to pull up
or lven overturn £or suddenl· I was terribly worried
aut Liddy. However, it \\JS too late. The toboggan
·whizzed utcontrollably c:!own the hill. I was only aware
of a cold, biting mass of churned up snow in my face.
17
I heud Uddy cry out anxiously-then no more. There
wa. a tremendous blow on my head as if &amp;om a sledge­
    </p>
    <p>
     hammer: somewhei;e there was a severe pain. My last
feeliJ\g was of being cold.

l was relieved of the tumult and agitation which took.
place aftef the accident. For the others it wa a painful
time. The had heard Liddy shout out and tht-y laught-rl
and teased from above in the darkneu. 'inallv, they
realised that something w:fs wrong and climbed uref ully
down to us. It took ,1 little while for thfm to sober do\\·i1
and come t,. a realisation of the po'lition. Liddv w,h
pale and halt nnconsciou'I, but quite unharmed; onl
her glov were torn and her delilat white hand were
a little bruised and bleeding. They carr!ed me away
thinking I was dead. At a later date I looked in vain for
the apple or pear tree into which the toboggdn had
cra'Shed and broken m bones.

It was thought that I had concusion of the brain but
matten were not quite so bad. My head and brain were
indeed affected and it was a long time before I regained
    </p>
    <p>
     consciousness in the hospital, but the wound hc,dcd and
my brain was unharmed. On the other hand, my left
leg, which was broken in several placc'I, did not full
heal. Since that time I have been a cripple who can
only walk with a limp, who can no longer stride out or
even run and danc.e. My vouth wcti, thu unexpectcdl
directed along a path to quieter region, along whic.h I
travelled, not without a feeling of hamc and resi'ltanre.
But I did go along it and sometimes.it seems to me'Jhat
I would not willingly have mis'ICd that eveninJ toan,
ride and iu cen.equences in my life.

I confess that I think less about the broken leg than
18
about the other conaequenc;es of the accident, which were
far happier. Whether it can be attributed to the accident,
the shock and the glimpse into darkness, or .the long
period of lying in bed, !eing quiet fer months and
thinking things over, the course of treatment prov
beneficial t me.
    </p>
    <p>
     The beginning of that Jong period of lying in bed, say,
the first week, has quite vanished from my memory. I
was unconsciou a 1,rreat part of the time and even when
I firially recovered full consciousness, I wa1 weak and
listless. My mother arrived and every day sat faithfully
beside my bed in the hospital. When I looked at her
and \poke a few words, i,he seemed calm and almost
cheerful, alt1lough I learned later that i,he was very
worried .about me, not, indeed, for Ill life-, but for my
reason ometimes we chatted for a long time in the
quieL liul&lt;' hospital ward. Yet our relationship had
never ,been very intimate. I had always been closer to
my father. Sympathy on her part and gi:atitude on mine
had made r. lJ\Ore understanding and inclined to draw
closer, bm ifle had both waited too long and become
accustomed to a mutual "laiser-faire" for the awakening
affection to i,how itself iu our conversation. '\\'e were
glad lo be together and left some things unspoken. She
wa again my mother who !!o3W me lying ill and could
    </p>
    <p>
     care for me, and I saw her on&lt;e again through a boy's
eyes and for a time forgot &lt;.,enthing else. To be sure,
the old relationship was resumed later and we used to
avoil talking much about this pe1iod of sickness for it
-embarrassed \I!, both.

c!radualry, I began to r,.alise m position. and as I had
recovered from the fever and seemed peaceful, the doctor
19
no longer kept it a secret from me that I would have a
memento for good as a result of my fall. I saw my youth,
which I had hardly yet consciously enjoyed, grievously
cyt lhort and oimpoveris!ied!" I had plenty of time in
wLich to realise the state of alfain as I was bed-ridden
for anotht:r three months.

I i:hen tried hard to conceive my position and visualise
th shape of my future life, but I did not make much
progress. Too much thinling was still not good for me.
I soon became tired and sank into a. quiet reverie b
    </p>
    <p>
     which nature protected. me from anxiety and despair
and compelled me to rest in order to recover my health.
The thought of my misfortune tormeted me freqm:!ntly,
often half through the night, without my c1btaining any
solace.

Then one night I awal..ened after a ft.-w houri. of peace­
ful slumber. It seemed to me that I had had a pleasant
dream and I tried in vain to recall it. I felt remarkably
well and at peace, as if all unplea'5ant things were sur­
mounted and behind me. And a'i I lay there thinking and
felt light current of health and relief pervade me, a
melody &lt;.ame to my lips almost without any sound. -I
began to hum it and unexpectedly, music, which had w
long been a stranger, came bacl.. to me like a '!ouddenly
revealed star, and my heart beat to it rhythm, and mv
whole being blossomed and inhalt.-d new, pure air. It
did not reach my consciouness; I jut felt its presence
and it penetrated my being gently, as if melodious choir'5
were singing Lo me in the disLance.
    </p>
    <p>
     With this inwardly refreshed feeling I fell aslep ain.
In the mornqig I was in a good humour and free fron1
depression, whic.h I had not been for a long time. My
o
mother noticed it and asked what was making me feel
happy. I reflected a while and then said that I had not
thought about my violin for a long time; then I.suddenly
thought about it again adit gave me pleasure.
"But you will not be able to play for a long time yet,"
she said in-a somewhat worried tone.

"That does not matter-also even if I never play
again."

She did not understand and I could not explain to her.
But she noticed that things ltere going better with me
and that no fieu8 lurked behind this unfounded cheer­
fulness. After a few days she c:,autiously mentioned the
matter again.
    </p>
    <p>
     "How are fou progressing with your music? We have
felt that you were tired of it and your father has spoken
to your teachers about it. We do not want to persuade
you lea:.t of all just now . . . but we do feel that if you
have made a mistake and would rather give it up, OU
should do so and not continue out of a feeling of-defiance
or shame. '":h1.t do you think?" · ·

I again , ,·.&gt;ught about this period of isolation. I tried
to tell my mother about my affairs and she seemed to
understand. I thought I now saw my goal clearly again
and I would not, at all events, run away from it but
study right till the end. That ii; how things remained
for the time being. In the depths of my soul where my
mother could not penetrate, there wa,; sweet music.
Whether or not I should now make an progress with
the wolin, I could again hear the world round as if it
werf artistically created and I knew that outside music
l!hcl'e was·fio salvation for me. E,·cn if UJ.Y condition
    </p>
    <p>
     never permitted me to play the violin again, 1 would
21
resign myself to it. perhaps consider another career or
even become a merchant; it was not so important. As a
merchant. or anything else, I would not be any less
sensitive to muaic or live andebreatbe lt"II through music.
I \vould compose again I It was not, as I had said to my
mothtt, die thought of m' violin that mademe happy,
but the intense desire to make music, to create. I again
often felt the clear ,·ibrations of a rarified atmosphere,
the intense com·entrationo0f ideas, as I did previom,ly in
my best hours, and I also felt that bv the side of it, a
crippled leg and other misfortunes we.e of little impor­
tance.

From that time on I was \'ictorious.and however often
since then ID" desires have travelled inl&gt; regions of
physical fitness and yopthful pleasures, and however
often I have hated and &lt; uned my crippled state with
bitterness and a deep sense of shame, it has not been
    </p>
    <p>
     beyond my power to bear this load: there has been some­
thing there to console and compensate me.

Occasionally my.father came down to see me and. one
day, as I continued to impro,·e, he took my mother home
with him again. For the hrst few da\'S I felt rather lonely,
and also rather ashamed that I had not talked more
affectionately to my mother and taken more interest in
her thoughts and rares. But my other emotion was so
intense that these thoughts about good intentions and
feelings of compassion receded into the background.

Then unexpectedly someone came to visit me. who
had not ventured to do so while mv mother wa,; lhere.
It was Liddy. I was vc..-ry surprised ,to M'&lt;' her. Fol the,
first moment it did not enter my head that I 1'ad recetn1,
been on dose terms with her and very mu&lt;.h in love with
,I.I
her. She came in a state of great embarrassment, which
she disguised very badly. She had been afraid of my
    </p>
    <p>
     mother and judgment against her for she knew she was
responsible for my misf&amp;rtune, and bnly gradually
realised that things were not so bad, and that she was   not really affected. She breathed freely again ut could
not conceal a feeling of slight disappointment. The girl,
despite her troublt-d conscience, had in her feminine
heart been deeply e,r.cited about the whole business and
at such a great isfortune. Sne even used the word
"'tragic" several times, at which I could hardly conceal a
smile. She had not really been prepared. to see me so
cheefful and 'IO li¥1e concerned about my misfortune.
She had had  in mind to ask. my forgiveness, the granting
of which a'i her belmed would have given her tremendous
satisfactioh, and at the dimax of thi, stirring scene she
wo.! !,J.ve triumphantly conc1uered my heart anew.

Jt was inded no small relief to the foolish girl to see
me socontent&lt;'d and to find hcnelf fr&lt;'e ftnm all blame
and accusation. Howev&lt;'r, this relief did not make her
feel happ ,mJ the more her conscience was eased and
her anxiety removed, the quieter and cooler did I see
    </p>
    <p>
     her become. Sub,equently, it hurt her not a little that
I regarded her part in the affair as &lt;10 slight, and indeed,
even seemed to have forgotten it. I had quenched her
apology and all the emotion and ruined the whole pretty
scene. Despite my extreme politeness, she observed that
I was no longer in Io,·e \\rith her, and that was the wont
thiT\l of all. Even if I had lost my arms and legs, I
shcvitd stil\ have been .in admirer of hers, whom indeed
:he did not love and who had never given her any
pleasure, but if I had been wretchedly lovesick, it would .,
have been a greater source of satisfaction to her That
was not the case, as she ao well observed, and I saw the
warmth 211d interes.t on the pretty face of the sympathetic
sip-visitor gradually grow l&amp;s and disappear. Aftrr an
effuslve farewell, she finally went away and never came
again altHough she faithfully promised to do so.

However painful it was to me and however much it
reflected on my power of judgment to see my previous
infatuation sink into insignificance and become laugh­
    </p>
    <p>
     able, the visit did, in fact, do me p. I was very
surprised to sec thi attractive girl for the first time
without pas,ion and without rose-coloured spectacles,
and to realise that I had not known lwr at all. If someone
had shown me the doll which I had embrafed aud loved
when I was three yt"ars old, the lack of interest and
change of feeling could not have surprised me-.nore than
in this case, when I i.aw as a complete stranger this girl
whom I had so strongly desired a few weeks earlier.

From among the companions who were present at that
Sunday outing in the winter, two visited me several times,
but we found little to talk about. I saw how relieved
they were when I improved, and I asked them not to
bring me any more gifts. We did not mret ag-.tin later.
It was a strange business and it made a sad and curious
impression on me; everything that had belonged to me
in these earlier yean of my life left me, wa alien and
J01t to me. I suddenly saw how sad and artihcial my
life had been during this period, for the loves, friends,
    </p>
    <p>
     habits and pleasures of these yean were discard lille
badly fitting clothes. I parted from ·them without faine
and all that .-emained was to wonder that 1could hav
endured them so long.

I was surprised to receive another visitor to whom [
had never given a thought. One day, that strict and ironic
gentleman, my piano teacher, came to see me  Holding
his walking-stick and wefling gloves, he spoke id his
usual sharr,, almost biting tones, C'alled the ill-fat
toboggan-r1c:le "that women's ride business," afld by the
tone of his words, seemed to take it quite for granted
that ill-luck had ensued. All the same, it was remarkable
that he had come, and he also proved, although he did
not change his tone of voice, that he had not come with
any bad intentios. but to tell me that despite my mis­
takes he considered me a pas.11ablc student. Hi11 colleague,
the fiolin teacher,.was of the same opinion and they
therefore hod I would soon return fit and well and
give them pleasure. Although this speech almost sounded
    </p>
    <p>
     like an apology for previous harsh treatment, and was
df'I·. c. ·.:J in the same sharp tones, it was as sweet to me
as a declMa: ion of love. I gratefully held out my hand
to the-unpopular teacher and in order to sh,&gt;w confidence
in him, I tried to t&gt;xplain the course of my life during
these year· anu how my old attitude towards music was
beginning to return.

The p10fessor shook his head and whistled derish·ely.

Thep he said: "You want to become a composer?"

"If .possible," I said disheartened.

"Well, I wi'.lh you luck. I thought 'OU would now
resume practising with fresh enthusiasm, but if you want
to compose, you don't, of course, need to do that."
"qti, ! didn't mean that."

":,,Vhat then? You know, when a music student is lazv
    </p>
    <p>
     and doesn'rlike hard work, he always takes 1'P composing.
Anyone can do that and each one, of course, is a genius."

15
"I really don't mean that at all. Shall I become a
pianist thel\ ?"

.. No, piy dear friend, you could never become that­
but you could ,become a rc:t.iOnably good violinist."
! .. J wish to do that, tool"
.. 1 hope..you mean it. Well, I must not stay'any longer.
Hope you will soon be better. Good-bye."

'fhereupon he went away and left me with a feeling of
amazement. I had thought very little about the return
to my studies. I was still afraid things would be difficult
and go wrong and that everything w:»uld be as it had
been previously, but these thoughts did not remJ.in with
me long, and it also seemed as if tlte surly prof611or's
visit was well-meant and a ,ign of sinc-e1e'-good-will.
    </p>
    <p>
     After I had sufficiently recovered my health, it was
intended that I should go away for a period of conval­
escence, but I preferred to wait until the long vacation.
I wished to return to work immediately. I then exper­
ienced for the first time what an ai.tonishing effect a
period of rest can. have, particularly a compul'IOr one.
I began my studies and practi\ing with mi\trust, but
t"verytbing now went better than previomll, To be sure,
I now fully realised that I would never become a virtuoso,
but in mv present mood thi11 did not trouble me.

Besides, matters were going well. In particular, the
impenetrable undergrowth of mu&amp;ic. theory, harmony and
the study of c.ompo&amp;ition had been tramformed into an
able, attrac.tive 1,r.mlen. I felt that the inroads and
incursion,; which I mc1de during my lc&amp;&amp;0ns no 16Jiger
defied all the rules and laws, but that through auiduous,
study a narr9w but clearly dii,c: ernible path 'to freedon\
was revealed. There were indeed still hours and days
    </p>
    <p>
     26
and nights when I seemed to be confronted by impen­
etrable barrien, and with a dred brain I flinched in the
face of obstacles and pitfalls, but I did not .despair again
and I saw the narrow padl become· clearer and diore
accessible.

On closing for the holidays at the end of -the term,
the teacher of theory said to me, much to my surprise:
.. You are the only student this year who really seems to
understand something about music. If you ever compose
anything, I hould like to see it."

With these conJorting words ringing in my ears, I set
off for my holidays. I had not been home for a long
time, and during tllc railway journey I again pictured
my native pllce with affection, and conjured up a pies
of half-forgotten memories of my childhood and early
youth. My father was waiting for me at the station and
wr-j, :·. e home in a cab. The following morning I
    </p>
    <p>
     already felt ,m urge to go for a walk through the old
streets. 1-·or the first time I was overcome with a feeling
of tragedy at my lost ,outhful htnes.-. It wa'i painful
to me to :.i\rc to l&lt;'an on a stick and limp with my
crooked, rstttf leg along these lanes, where f'very corner
reminded me of boyish games and past plearsures. I came
back. home feeling dejected, and whoever I saw, and
whose-ever voice I heard, and whatever I thought about,
everything reminded mt bitterlr of the past and mv
crippled state. At the 'lame time, I was al'io unhappy
because my mother was les" tnthu'&gt;ia'ltic than ever about
my ,Jioice of career, although he did not actuallv tell
lllJ.e ,o. A 1usidan who could make an appearance as a
s1ender, erect virtuoso or an impressive-lookiag conductor,
she might have conceded, but that a semi-cripple with
17
only moderate qualification  and a shy dipoition could
bring himself to continue a a violinist was inconceivable
to her. Jn this codnection he was supported by an old
frielld who was a distant r!lative. My father bad once
    </p>
    <p>
     f&amp;rbidden her to come to the house, which caused her
to concei,,e a violent dislike for him, although this did.
not. keep her away for she often came to see my mother
wtiile my father was at the oflie. She had never liked
me and had hardly ever spoken to me since I was a
young boy. She saw in my choice of career an unfortunate
sign of degeneration and in my ac:ident an obvious
punishment and the hand of Providence.

In order to give me pleasure, myjathcr arrangtfd for
me to be invited to play a solo in a conct'tt to be given
by tl'e town's Music Society. But I felt I could not do
so. I refused and retired for many days to the 11rnall
room which I had occupied as a boy. J was particularly
harassed by continual enquiries and the necessity to
\tand talking so that I hardly ever went out. I then found
myself looking ow of the window at the life in th&lt;" street
and at the school-children, and above all I looked at the
young girls with unhappy longing.
    </p>
    <p>
     Haw could I ever hope to declare my love I&lt;&gt; a girl
again, I thought I I 11hould always have.-10 OJtand outside,
like at a dance, and look on, and never be taken 11eriomlv
by girls, and if any were \erv friendly with me, it would
be out of sympathy. Oh, I was more than sick of
s:ympathyl

As it was I could not rc.-main at home. My pqents
also suffered considerably aOJ a remit of my cxtemei
melancholy 'ld hardly raised anv objection Jhen I ask
permission to r.et off immediatc.-ly on the long-planned
.t8
journey which my father had promised me. Later, my
infirmity caused me to be creative, and at the same time
destroyed my heart's wishes and hopes, but I ¥Ver felt
my weakness and deformity_, keenly as I iid then, when
the sight of every healthy young man and every pretty
woman deptessed and hurt me. I slowly grew usdl to
my stick and to the limp until it hardly disturbed me
any more, and with the passing of the yean I remained
    </p>
    <p>
     conscious of my injury without bitterness and accepted
it with resignation or humour.

Fortunately, I fas able to travel alone and did not
need to wait fof anything. The thought of any compan­
ion Wbuld have beei repugnant to me and would have
disturbed my 11&gt;.ecd for inner pea&lt;.e. I already felt better
as I sat in the train and there was no-one to look at me
curiously and sympathetically. I travelled day and night
with,,,., stopping, with a feeling of reall taking flight
and breathe,' a sigh of relief when, 011 the second day, I
caught sight of high mountain peaks through steamed
windows. I reached the last station as it was growing
dark. I wr t \\Carily yet happily alon dark lanes to the
fint inn ol a compact little town. Afttr a glas of deep
red wine I slept for ten houn, throwing ofl the weariness
of tr3:vel and also a good deal of the distre&amp;!I of mind with
which I had come.

The following morning I tool a seat in the small
    </p>
    <p>
     mountain train which travelled through narrow ,allef$
and past white sparkling stream-, toward11 the mountains.
Ther:f from a small, remote sration. I tra, elled by coach;
y mid-day I was in one of the highest villages in the  c3untry.
I stayed right into the autumn in the onl small inn of
.tg

the quiet little village, at times being the only guest. I
had had it.in mind to rest here for a short time and then
travel fu.rlher through Switzerland and see some more of
foreign parts and the world.But there was a wind at that
liei,ht, which blew air across which was so &amp;esh and
strong, that I felt I never wanted to leave it.' One side-of
the steep valley was covered almost to the top with fir.
u;ees, the other slope was sheer rock. I spent my days here,
by the sun-warmed rocks, or by the side of one of the swift,
wild stream,, the music of which c.ould be heard during
the night throughout the whole villagJ. At the beginning,
I enjoyed the solitude like a cool, healing drink. No one
bothered about me; no-one -.howd any curitw;ty or
    </p>
    <p>
     sympathy towards me I was alone and fee lile a bird
in the air and I soon forgot my p.1.in and unhealthy
feelings of envy. At times I regretted bt'ing unable to go
far into the mountains to sec unknown valleys and pcah
and to dimb along dangerous pathb. Yet I wao; not
unhappy. After the events and excitement of the pai,t
months, the calm.solitude surrounded me like a fortrei,.,,
I found peace again and learned to acc&lt;pt my phyo;ical
defect with resignation, although pcrhap1 not with cheer­
fulness.

The weeks up there were almo'il the mo,;t beautiful in
my life. I breathed the pure. clear air, dranL. the icy
water from the streams and watched the herd,; of goats
grazing on the steep slope,;, guarded by d.,rk-haircd,
111using goatherd!t. At times I heard storm.. resound
through the valley and saw mist1 and &lt;.loud,; at un6sually  close quarters. In the c.lefts of roc.lr..'I I obsen·ed the small,
del\cate, briyhtly-covered flowers and the manv wonderful
mosses, and on clear days I used to like to walk uphill
!0
    </p>
    <p>
     for an hour until I could see the dearly-lined ditant
peak.a of high mountains witll, blue silhouettes and white,
sparkling snow-fields across the other side of l'Jle hill.

On one part of the footpath where ·a tbin trickle-of
water from a small spring kept it damp, I found on every
fine day a stlarm of hundreds of smalJ, blue b11tterfties
drinking the water. They scarcely moved when I
approached, and if I disturbed them, they whirled about
with a fluttering of tiny, silky wings. Since I made the
discovery, I onl' went that way on sunny days, and each
time the dense, blfte swarm was there, and each time it
was a holiday.

When I consider it more closely, that period was not
really as perfectly :rene and sunny and joyous as it
seems in retrospec.t. There were not only days when it
rained and even day11 when it snowed and was cold;
therr ,. , ... e ah,o days when it was stormv and glooll',Y
wilhm me. I was not used to being alone and after the
    </p>
    <p>
     first days of repo11e and delight had passed I again felt
the pain from which I had run away. auddenh· return
at times wV I L.e.1dful intemit,·. Man a cold evening I
sat in my lmy room with m, travelling mg &lt;Ner my
knees, wearily and unrestrainedly giving wa,· ,o foolish
thouhts. Everthing that 0ung blood d.:sired and
hoped for, partie111 and the gaietv of danciny. the love of
women and adventure, the triumph of stre.gth and love,
lay on the other side of the 'lhore. far removed an&lt;i
inaccessible to me for ever. E,en that wi"d. defiant period
of halt-forced gaien, which had endeci in m falJ in the
tvboian, then seemed in m,· mernor· to be beautiful and
cdtou\"ed in a·paradisiacal wav hl..e? lost landf pleasyre,
the ec.ho of which still came aero .. , to me with bacchanal
!P
intoxication from the distance. And at times, when
storms pa;ued over at night, when the continl sound
of the Id, down-pouring rain was drowned by the
strc,ng, plainve 'rustling t:irough the storm-swept fir­
. wood, and when a thousand inexplicable sounds of a
    </p>
    <p>
     sleepless summer night echoed through the g:rders of the
of the frail house, I la' dreaming hopelessly and
restlessly about life and the tumult of love, raging and
reproaching God. I felt like a miserable poet and
dreamer, whose most beautiful dream was only a thin,
coloured .soap-bubble, whilst thousanJs of others in the
world, happy in their youthful strength, stretched out
joyous hands for all the prizes of life.

Just as I seemed to see all the gloriou:..beauty of the
mo1:1ntains and everything that my senses enjoyed as
through a veil and from a great distance, so also did there
ar·.e between me and the frequent wild outbursts of
gri11. f, a veil and a slight feeling of strangeness, and soon
the brightness of the days and the grief of the nights
were like external voices which I listened to with an
inviolate heart. · I saw and felt myself like a mass of
moving douds, like a battlefield full of figllting troops,
and whether I experienced pleasure and enjoyment, or
grief and clepression, both moods seemed clearer and
    </p>
    <p>
     more comprt hensible to me. They arose from the depths
ohny soul, a1a,J came to me externally in harmonies and
series of sounds which I heard as if in my sleep and
which took posst.'lsion of me against my will.

It was in the qu1t.t of one evening when I was ret ... rning
&amp;om the rocky side '&gt;f the valley that I understooa. it all
clearly for t/e fint tia 1e, and as I meditated upon ic a.ad
found myself to be a riddle, it suddenly occurred to me
51
what it all signified-that it was the return of those
strange remote hours which I had experienced with
some misgiving when I was younger. And with this
memory, that wonderful clarify returned, the almost glass;
like brightness and transparency of £ecling41 where cvsry­
thing appealed without a mask, where things -were no
longer labelled sorrow or happine&lt;1s, hut everything
signified strength and sound and creative relca"I&lt;". Music
was arising &amp;om the turmoil, iridescence and conflict of
my heightened sensibiliti.
    </p>
    <p>
     I now viewed te bright day. the sunhhine and the
woods, the brown rocks and the di&lt;1tant snow-c.overcd
mountlins with heigwencd feeling-. of happiness and joy,
and with a n&amp; conception. During the dark houn I
felt my sick heart expand and beat more furiously, and
I no longer made any distinction between plea'lure and
pair., l.,..1, one was similar to the oth&lt;"r; both hurt and
ooth were p1u.ious. Whether my inner life went well
or badly, my di"ICovered strength "ltood peaccfullv outside
looking on and kn,;-w that light and dark were closely
relatl"d an,' , hac sorrow and peace were rhythm, part and
spirit of the same great music.

I could not write this mmic down: it was !ltill strange
to me and il'I territon- wa unfamiliar. But I could hear
it. I could feel the world in its perfection within me, and
I could al&lt;10 retain something of it. a 11mall part and echo
of it, reduced and translate.cl. I thought about it anfi
concentrated on it for daH. I found that it could be
    </p>
    <p>
     &lt;-xprelcd with two ,riolins and began in complete
bmC&gt;fiFnce, like a fledgeling tning its wings. to write . . . down my first sonata.

As I played the first movement on my violin in my
B
room one morning, I was fully aware of its weakness,
incompleteness and faults, but every bar weat through
me likr.· a heart-tremor. I did not know whether this
,music was geod, but I kne\r that it was my own musk,
born and experienced within me and never heard any­
where e!.se before.

· Downstairs in the coffee-room, motionless and with
hair as white as snow, there sat year in year out, the
innkeeper's father, ·who was over eighty years' old. He
never said anything and only looked around him atten­
tively tlirough peaceful-looking eye:. It was a mystery
as to whether the solemn. silent man possessed more
than human wisdom and stillness, of spirit, or wht'thcr
his mental powers had deserted him. I' went down to
    </p>
    <p>
     that old man that morning. my violin under my arm, for
I had observed that he alwa'S listened attentively to my
playing and indeed to all music. As I found him alone,
I stood before him, tuned my ,·iolin and playro m,· first
movement to him. The old man directed his peaceful­
looking eyes, the whites of which were yellowish and the
eyelids red, towards me and listened, and whenevt.-r I
think of that music, I also sec the old man again and his
peaceful-lking eyes watc·hing me. Whm I had finished,
I nodded to him. He winked knowingl and i.cemed to
understand everything. His yellowish eyes returned my
glmce; then he averted his gaze, lowered hi\ head a little
and returned to his former motionless state.

Autumn began early at that height, and a I made my
departure one morning, there was a thick mist wl\1fh fell
in fine drops as cold rain, but I tcK&gt;k with le the
sunshine ol the good days and also.as a thankful reme:'m­
brance, courage for my next path in life.
M
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter three
    </head>
    <p>
     During my last term at the School of Music. I made the
acquaintance of the singer Muoth. who had quite a
creditable rcputaLion in the town. He had finished his
studies four Car,; '!go and had immediatly obtained a
position at the Opera House where he was at present sLill
taking-lesser r,ile.,, and by the side of older weJl-known
singers was 1'¥&gt;t outitanding. Many people, however,
considered him to be a future celebrity whose next step
must lead him to fame. I had seen him on the stage in a
nnu.i,,:.. of roles and he had nrongl· impres,;ed me.
although no always favtmrably.

We-became acquainted in the following way. After
my return to the S&lt;hool of Mmic, I took nty violin
sonata an1' L\\ ., songs that I bad compo,;cd Lo the teat.her
    </p>
    <p>
     who bad showed such kind sympath towards me. He
promised to look through the work and give me his
opinjon about it. It was a long Lime before he did so,
and meantime I could detect a certain feeling of embar­
ras.'lment on his part whenever 1 met him. Finally, he
called me aside one day and returned the manuscript o
me.

"He.Te is your work," he said somewhat uncomfortably.
"I hoJ-: you have not built too many hopes upon itl
Tllcre is something in it. without any dout, and you
may yet achieve somctning. To be quite honest. I
S5
thought you were already more mature and tranquil, I
did not re.ally aedit you with such a passionate: nature.
I expect something quieter and more plea,ing, some­
thing more technically conect and whkh could have
Ueen judged technicc1lly. But your work is not good
tecHnical,ly so I can say little about that. It is a brave
auempt, the merit of which l am unable to Judge, but
    </p>
    <p>
     a, your tec1cher I cannot p1ai11e it. You hclV&lt;' put both
less and more in it than I expec.ted and you thus place
me in an embarrassing position. l am too much of a
school-master to overlook the sim, of \tyle, and whether
you will be able to outweigh them l\ith origmalit, I
should not like to uy. I will therefore wall until I see
some more of your work. I wish \ou It ck. You will
compose agc1in. I know that."

I then went awc1 and did not know whJ.t to mc1l&lt;' of
his verdict, which w.u. no re.ll cr1tici1,m. It emed to
me that one should be able to lool at a piece of wod,
and re immedic1tel wheth&lt;.T it wc1,; clone a'I a game J.nd
pauin.e, or whether it .iro,;e from nec&lt;''l&amp;it c1nd the
heart.

I put' the m.1nu,;u1pt a\\a and det idt.'tl to forget all
about j,t for the time being and work rec1ll hard dming
my last few months of \tUd',
9n.c&lt; day I received an invitation from a fclmil with
    </p>
    <p>
     ,1,,.rong mu,;ical interest'§. Thev were f1 iends of my parent,
and I used to ,i,;it them once or twice cl year It wa'I one
of the usual evening gathering,; e:t..r&lt;'pl that there were
one or two well-known people from the Opera '\-lou,;e
' there whom I knew b sight. The \mgcr Muoth wa ..
also there. ,He interested me mo'lt of .ill c1rtd it was the
first time I had seen him ell 'luc.h clme quarter-. He w,1.,
36

tall and handsome, a dark, imposing-look man with a
confident and perhaps al.-eady somewhat pampered
manner. One could see that women liked him. Apart
from his manner, he seemctl neither pleased nor prou,d
and there was something in bis look and counten;mce
which exp:Cssed much seeking and discontent, When I
was introduced to him, he acknowledged me with a short
stiff bow, without saying anything to me. After a while
he suddenly came up to me and said: "Isn't your name
Kuhn? Then I lrcacly know you a little. Profe-.sor S.
has shown me yotir work. You must not -hold it against
    </p>
    <p>
     him; he was not indiscreet. I came up just as he was
lookii\g at it, and aa there was a song there, I looked at
it with his pl!rmission."
J W,l!&gt; surprised and embarra!&gt;..ed. "Whv are -ou telling
me about it?" I asked. "I believe th&lt;' profesi.or didn't
li!.t h ..

"Does tl1at hurt you? Well, I liked the song very
much. I could sing it if I had the accompaniment. I
should lik&lt;' you to let me have i 1."  ·
"You · , eel it? Can it he sung then?"
"Of course-although it would not be suitable for any
type of concert. I should like to have it form· own use
at lio111e."

"I will write it out for -ou. But why do -ou want to
have it?"

"Bt."Causc it interest,; me. There is real mu'lic in that
song. You know it yourself."
    </p>
    <p>
     Hlooked at me. and his way of looking at people
macJ&amp; me feel uncomtortablc-. He looked me straight in
te face, studying it with complete calmwess, and his
eyes were full of curiosity.
37

.. You are younger than I thought. You must have
already suffered a great deal'
.. Yes," f said, .. but I cannot talk about it."
"You don't 1teed to. I sha'h't ask you any questions."
lijs look disturbed me. After all, he was quite a well-
known ma&amp;n and I was still a student, so that' although I
did" not at all like his way of asking questions, I could
odly defend myself weakly and timidly. He was not
arrogant but somehow he pierced my sense of misfortune
and I could onl put up a slight resistance for there was
no real opposition on my part. I had' a feeling that he
was unhappy and that he had an undesired, powerful
way of seizing on people as if he warted to snatch 'some­
thing from them that would comforl hit'h. His dark,
    </p>
    <p>
     searching eyes were as sad as the were hold and the
expression on his face made him look. much older than
he really was!

Soon afterwards, while his remarl..i. wtre ,1ill occupying m, tJioughts, I saw him chatting politcl and merrily to
the ho't's daughtr. who was li,tcninK 10 him with delight
and lked at him ai. if he w&lt;·n· a wonderful peri.on.
I had lived such a loneh life sincc m, auidcnt. that
I thought abi,ut this meeting for marn days, and it
disturbed t me. I was too unsure of my,elf not to stand
in .f we of i this superior man, and yet too lonel' and in
need of someone, not to be flattered by hi11 approach.
Finau, /, I thought he had forgotten me and his whims
0/ ,,_ t ·evening. Then, to my confusion, he visited me
a,. L my rooms.

It was on a December evening and it was alrrady
dark. The i.nger knocked at the door and came in ls
if there was nothing remarkable about his visit, and
58
    </p>
    <p>
     without any introduction and superficialities he immedi­
ately entered into conversa'tion with me. I had to let
him _have the song, and a, he saw my hired piaD4&gt; in
the room, he wanted to sing it immediate1.y. I had to sit
down and 1ccompany him and so I heard my song ung
properly for the first time. It was sad and Jboved me
against my will, for he did not sing it at full singing
strength but softly, as if to himself. The text, which I
had read in a magazine the previous year and had copied,
was as follows:
When the south wind blows
The avalanche tun,bles
\nd Jeath's dirge rumbles.
Is that God's will?
Through the lands of men
I do wander alone,
Ungreeted and unknown.
Is that God"s willi'
Pain is mv lot.
    </p>
    <p>
     My heart is like lead.
I fear that God is dead!
-Shall I then liver
From the way he sang it. I could tell that he liked the
song.
Wi were silent for a i,hort time; then I asked him if
he culd point out any mistakes and suggest any correc­
tioJ¥.
Muoth gave me one 1f hi,; keen lf'lOks a!ld shook his
head.

39
.. There is nothing to correct," he said. "I don't know
whether the ,·omposition if1 good or not. I don't 'under­
stal\d adything about that., There is experience and
feeling in the" song and because I don't write poetry
myself, or compose. I am glad when I find. 1omething
that.seems individual and that I want to sing."
:But the text is not mine," I exclaimed.
"Isn't it? Well, it doc.·11n't mattt.-r; the text is of secon­
    </p>
    <p>
     dary importan&lt;.e. You must have experien&lt;.ed it, other­
wise you could not have written the qmsic."
I offered him the copy which I had had rc.ady for
some daS-He took it, rolled it up and pu.,hed i,t into
hi coat-pocket.

"Come and visit me ,omc time., it you ant," he said
and gave me his hand. "I !..now vou lead a quiet life.
I don't want to diuurb it, but now and then one is glad
to look a good fellow in the face."
When he had gone, hi., l,u11t word, and his smile
remained with me. They were in L.l'Cping with thf' &lt;JOng
he had sung and ith everthing th.it I L.m.-,\ of the man.
The longer I pondered upon it, the clearer it bt.-c.ime Lo
me, and in the end I felt I under .. tood thi11 man. I
understood why he had c.ome to me, why he lil.ecl my
song, why he almo.,t pre,;umptiom,h intruded upon me,
and why he ,;eemcd half-sh, half-bold to me He wa,;
unhappy, an inward pain gnawed al him, and hi11 lone­
ljness had bcc.omc intolc1able to him. Thi, unhappy man
    </p>
    <p>
     had been proud and had tasted 'iolituclc. He co11Id no
longer endure it; he was searching for people, for a kind
look and a little underLanding, and he was read-y 10
11arrifice hirmelf for them. Thal i., what I thought al the
time.

My feelings towards Heinrich Muoth were not clear.
I sensed his desires and netds, yet I feared he could be
a cruel, relentless man who might use and then disprd
me. I was too young and y experienct! of people too
limited, to '1nderstand and accept the fact that he al91ost
revealed himself naked to people and in doing so, hardly
seemed to know any shame. Yet I al\O saw that here was
a sensitive passionate man who was suffering and who
was alone. Involuntarily, I remembered rumours I had
heard about Mun. vague, disjointed students' talk, the
exact details of whid1 I had forgotten, lnit the echo and
pattern of whic.h I .hd prC!'&lt;'n·ed in JO memory. There
were exciting talts wf women and adventure, and with­
out remembcfing one of them, I !lf'Cmed to rec.all some­
    </p>
    <p>
     thing about bloodshed, and that he wa'I involved in an
accou11t of a murder or suidde.

When l had &lt;·om1ucrcd my shness and a.,ked one of
my colleagues about it, the matter seemed lf'ss serious than
J had thought. Mooch, it was sairl, had had a love-affair
with a yop·1g woman of good family, nd the latter had,
in fact, , 1.amitted suicide two ·ears' ago. but no-one
had ventured to connect the !linger with this affair with
more than l.antiousl made allu!&gt;ions. Evidently, my
imaination, stirred by the meeting with this strange
and somewhat disturbing person, bad created this atmos­
phere of horror around him. Just the same, he must
have suffered over that lmc affair.

I did not have the courat· to go and sec him. I could
not canceal the fact from myself that 1-kinrich Muoth
was em unhappy and pcrlups desperate person who
wanted and· needed me, and at times I felP I ought to
obey the call and that I was contemptible if I did not
    </p>
    <p>
     41
do so. Yet ,I did not go; another feeling preven_ted me.
I could not give Muoth wh.it he sought from me. I was
qui\_e different from him and even if in many ways I was
also isolated a1u!. not fully ndentood by other people.

eveq if I was different &amp;om everyone else an separated
from niosl people by fate and my talents, I did not want
to. make an issue of it. I had a feeling of avenion and
repugnance towards Muoth's vehement manner. He was
a theatrical man and an adventurer, I thought, and he
was perhapi, destined to live a tragis; and public life.
On the contrary, I wanted a quiet life: cxdtemcnt and
audacious talk did not 11Juit me-resignation wa'i my lot.
That was how I argued with myself t set my mind at reit.
A man had knocled al In door. I was '-&lt;&gt;rr for him
and perhapi I ought to put him before IDl»Clf, but I
wanted peace and did not want to let him in. I threw
myself energetically into my work hut &lt;.ould not rid
m'self of the tormenting idea that o,omeone stood behind
    </p>
    <p>
     me and tugged t me.

As I did not come, Muolh ag.tin tool the initiatite. I
received a note from him wiiuen in lare hold ,hara&lt;.Lers,
which read:
Dear Sir.
I ui,ually celebrate nn birthdav on the 11th
January with a few fritnd\. Would ,ou like to
come along? It woul,1 ghc m pleasure if we
could hear your sonata on thi,; occa11Jion. What
do OU think? Have OU a colleague with whom . . you c.ould play 1t, or shall I 1end someone tq vou?
Stefan Kranll would be agr&lt;·ahle. It would 11lcase
me vry much.
Hcinri&lt;.h Muoth
I had not expected that-to play my music, which
no-one yet knew about, before experts, and to play the
violin with Kranzl I Ashapied and grateful, I' accq,ted
the invitation, and onlf two days later l was requested
by KranzI. to send him the music. After another. two
days, he invited me to visit him. The well-kndwn violin­
    </p>
    <p>
     ist was still young. He was very pale and slender and
looked like a virt uow,.

As soon as I entered, he said, "So you are Muoth'r
friend I Well, lc&gt;' u .. start !itraight awa. If we go well
together, W&lt;' should be all right after plJ.ing it two or
three times."  Then he placed ;e'itand before me·. ga,·e me th&lt;' second
violin part, lharl.ed time and bcgdn with hi!. light sensi­
tive touch, !iO that in compari11on I wa., lp1ite feeble.
"1':nt so timid' ! " ht· 11houted a&lt; ro11&lt;, to me without
stopping, :md ,u· pla&lt;-d the musu right through.
"l'hat's all right!" he 11aid. "It\ a pin· ,ou ha,·en't
a better violin. But never mind .. Xow let 1h pla, the
Allegro · Ji· 1 le fai,ter so that no-one tale., it fur a funeral
march. 1'-cadyl"
I tht'n plmed my mu.,k c1uitc conhdenth with the
virtuoso, my modest ,iolin !lnunding quile \\di alongside
his valuable one. l wa'I 'iurprio.l·d to hnd thii, distin­
guishc&gt;d-looking man so natm JI. indeed, almoi-t nai,·e.
As I began to feel more at home and gathered up cour.
    </p>
    <p>
     J asked him with some hei.itation what he thought about
my r.omposition.

"'6011 will have to a11k i.omeonc eli,,c, m, dear sir. I
llonh undstand much about it. It's a little unll'tual.
but people like that. If Muoth likes it, ou can feel
flattered. He is not ca5\1y pleasc.d."
4:\
He gave me some advice regarding the playing and
showed me a few places wh alL&lt;'rations were necessary.
We prantJeci to have anoth praL tice the following day,
and I then departed.

It, was a comfort to me to find this man ,so natural
and sincere. If he was one of Muoth's fril·nds, pcrhap1 1
could also find a place amongst ahem. To be sure, he
was an accomplished artist and I was a beginner without
any great prospects. I was sorry that no-one would give
me an honest opinion of my work, ,The most sev&lt;.Tc
criticism would have been preferable to 1hese good-
    </p>
    <p>
     natured remarks whi&lt;.b said nothing. ;
It was bitterly cold at that time, -ii was difficult to
keep warm. My companion.. enthusia1i&lt;.ally1we11t '&gt;kating.
It was just a year since our outing wi1h Liddy. That
was not a happy period for me. I looled forward 10 the
evening at Muoth's, not because I ept.-cted too mu,h
from it, but because I had bad no friends and gaiety
for so long. During the night before the 11th J.muar,
I was awakened by an unu!lual noise and an ahno'it
amazing feeling of warmth in the air. I rose and werit
to the window, surprised that it wa'&gt; no longer cold.
The south wirid had '&gt;Uddenlv come. Damp and wann,
it lew vigorously. High above, the storm swept the
heavy. masses of cloudi, ac.ross the sky; in the 'itnall gaps
between the clouds, a few stars, wonderfull large and
brilliant, 1,hone through. The roof,; already had hlack
patches on them, and in the morning. when I wcn out,
all the snow had gone. The ,tree!:"&gt; and pl·ople's r.t,cs
see1ned strangely alt&lt;.Tcd, and evtrywhcrt there wn l
breath of prmature spring.
    </p>
    <p>
     That da I went about in a slate of feverish excite-
44
ment, partly on account of the south wind and the
intoxicating air, partly in &amp;nticipation of the evening.
I &amp;equently took. out my sqpata, played parts ot it, tkcn
pushed it away again. Sometimes I found it quite
beautiful; t other times it seemed trivial, melandloly
and vague to me. I could not have endured this state
of agitation and anxiety much longer. In the end, I did
not know whether I wa, looking forward to the forth­
coming evening or not.

However, it ca141Jc at la.,,. I put on my overcoat, took
my violin-case with me, and wt.nt to find l\fuoth's house.
Jt wa, with some difficulty that I found it in the dark.
It was far out in the, ,uburbs in an unknown and unfre­
&lt;1uentrd roal It wa'I a detached house with a large
garden, which looked untid and neglected. :From behind
tti· L&amp;  &lt;.lll'ICd gclte a largf' dn1t sprang at me. Someonf'
    </p>
    <p>
     whi11tled 1t Lack from a window, and growling, it accom­
panied me to the entrance. A little old woman with an
anxious expre1,sio1 on her fac&lt;' receit&gt;ed mt' hf're. took
my coat, nu loo me along cl brightl-lit pa,,age.
Kran1l. the ,·iolinist, lived in a ,ery elebrant fashion
and I had expected Mnoth, who was reputed to be rich,
to ive in a similar lavi11h wa\'. I now .. aw two large,
1,pacious room 11, far too large for a ha&lt; hclor who was
little at home. Apart from that, &lt;'\'enthing was very
simple, or not really simple ht casual and unarranged.
Part o the furniture ·as old and 'leemed to belong to
the l\ouse; among,t it were new things, bought indis­
crimitiately and placed about thl' room without any
farethough. Only the lighting was splendid. There
was no gas-instead there were a large num9her of white
candles in single, auracwvc pewter candlesticks. In the
45

main room there was also a kind of chandelier,· a plain
brass circle containing mahy candles. The chief item
    </p>
    <p>
     heae was a very good gr,md iano.
· In the room into which I was led, several men stood
tallting to each other. I put my ,·iolin-caso down and
said: .. Good-evening! " Some ot them nodded and then
turned to ea&lt; h other again. I 11tood there feeling uncom­
fort.ible. Then Kranzl, who w.111 .imong11t 1hem and had
not 11&lt;.-en me immediately. came across to me, held out
his hand, introduc.ed me to hi&lt;i, friend--and \.tid: .. Here
is our new violinist. -Have OU brought ,our violin
with you?" Then he &lt;·ailed et&lt; ro11s to the nc"-t :r;oom :
"Muoth. the Oung man with the ,,onara is here."
Heinrid1 Muoth then t..lm&lt;' in, gret.·red nie ,cry warmly
and took .m&lt; into the mu\i&lt; ux,rn \\hi&lt; h lookt:d chet'rful
and ft'\thc. An .1ttr,1&lt;.th t wom.m in a white drert'I
handed me .1 gl.tr,o, of o,hcrn he w.10, .111 .1&lt;1rc\s from the
Roal Thc.ttre. fo Ill 11m prio,t, I ohllt'noo that .apart
from ht'r, no other collcaguei. of the hoc,t had been
imited. She was the only I.id, pre11ent.
A\ I had tmptied my glao,s ,·er quid.h, p,1rtly through
embarr.issment, partl from an ino,tin&lt; tht· need to get
    </p>
    <p>
     warm after the damp, c,eniug wall, -.he poured me out
anQther and ignon"&lt;l mv prote11111 ... rake it; it won't do
you any harm. \\'e clo not cat until after the mu-.ic
Have OU brought Our \'iolin with ,ou -and the
10nata?"

I made rc\Crvcd replic11 and felt e111b.trr.ts!IC&lt;l . 1 did
not know what her relationi.hip iv.to, to Muoth, She
seemed to be the mistre4is of the hou-.e. She wasveo­
auractive. l subsequently not&lt;'d that my new friend
only went about with verv b'i'mtiful women.
46

Meantime, everyone came into the music-room. Muoth
put up a music-stand. Eve.yone sat down and soon I
was playing the music with Kranzl. I played mechani­
cally; it seemed poor to-nfe. Only now and then 'for
fleeting moments, like flashes of lightning, was I conscy&gt;us
of the fact iliat I was playing here with KranzL and that
the evening I had waited for so long with trepidation
    </p>
    <p>
     was here, and that a small gathering of experts and
discerning musicians were sittiug there listening to my
sonata. Onlv during the Rondo did I become aware that
Kranzl was plaitrg magnific.ently, but I as still so hy
and distracted from the music t:hat I continually thought
ahou other things ;ind it sudd&lt;·nly occurred to me that
I had not e"'n congratulated Muoth on his birthday.
We finished playing tlw so11ata. The ptctty ladv rose,
het,1 'lllt her hand to Krau,l and me, and opened the
door of a a11allcr room where a tal&gt;h-wa1, 'let for a meal,
with ,flowers and bottles of 'C\ine.

"At last!" cried one of the men, ''.I'm nearly starving.''
"You'rt" d 11ocking person," thr lad rephed. "What
will th&lt;· '-"mposer think?"
"Whilh composer? Is he hctc?"
She pointed me out. '"There he is."
He looked at me and laughed. "You 11hould ha\'e told
me that before. Anyway, the musk was very enjoyable.
But when a man is hungry---"
    </p>
    <p>
     We began the meal and as soon as the soup was
finished and the white wine wa'i poured our, Kranzl
rose Jnd proposed a toast to th&lt;' host on the occasion of
his irthday. Immediately ilfter the toast, l\luoth rose
tT» his feet. ""My dear K1anzl. if OU think I.am going to
make a speech in reply, you are mistaken. I don't want
47
any more speeches, please. But perhaps the oly one
that is necessary, I will takf upon myself. I thank our
young frjend for his hOnata, which I think iii, splendid.
Per'haps our Tiend Kranll wm some day be glad to
receive music of his to pla, whic.h he should do, for he
played lb,! sonata very i.pnp.uhctk.illy. I dtinl a toast
to the composer and to our good friendship."

They all clinked glasses, laughed, chaffed me a little,
and soon the good wine helped to produce an atmo.­
phere of gaiety into which I entered. It wai. a long time
since I had enjoed mi.tlf and felt t ea&amp;e in this way,
    </p>
    <p>
     in fact, I had not done i.o for a whole year. No\!, the
laughter and wine, the clinking of glai.\es, the interlning­
ling of voices and the sight of a ga', ptetty woman,
opened up closed doori. of pleamre to me, and I ea,ily
entered into the atmosphere of unre,trained merriment,
of light and livel convero..uion and i.miling f.tccs.

Shortly after the meal, everone rme and returned to
the music.-room. where wine and cigarette'§ were handed
round. A quiet-looking man who had not i.polen mm h
and who!tl' name I did not know, came up to me and
said 11ome kind word'§ about the ,onata, which I h.ive
quite forgotten. Then the ac.tre\S drew me into c.mner­
sation and Muoth sat down hci.ide u,. Wt' dranl anothe-r
gla5' of wine to our friendi.hip and 11uddenh, hh dark,
sad eyes sparkled and he said: "I know OUr story now."
He turned to the lady. "He broke hii. honeOJ while
tobogganing, out of love for a prett, irl." Th&lt;&gt;n he
turned to me again. "Thal ii. bt·antiful-to go pead
over heels down the hill at the moment when love i;I at
    </p>
    <p>
     its peak and i&amp; still quite unsullied. It is worth lming a
healthy leg for that." Laughing, ht' Mnptied his glass
48

and again looked gloomy and thoughtful. Then he
said: "What made you interested in composing?"
I told him how music had affected me sincf: I was a
young boy. I told him about the prcviou., i,ummer, aut
my flight into the mountains, about the song and .the
sonata.
"I see," he said slowly, "but why does it give you
pleasure? You can't exprcso; sorrow on paper and be
finished with it."
"I don't want to do that,'" J replied. "I don't want to
thrust aside and ie rid of anvthing but weakne"s and
constriction. I want to feel that plea.,urc and pain arise
from -ihe &amp;amc-source, that the,· arc a\pt-cts of the same
force and pertions  of the i,a1;1c piece of music, each
beautiful and each e'li,cntial.'"
    </p>
    <p>
     "'fan,'" he i,houted ,·chementh·, "you ha,·e a crippled
leg! Cau rnmic make you forget it:"
"?l{o, why? In an &lt;.ai,e, I can never make it better."
"And doci,n't that makt· OU de11r.aii:?'"
"It doc .. n,, ple.1..e me, OU can be 1oure of that, but I
hope it \\.11 never bring me to despair."
"Then 'OU arc lucky, hut I wouhln't e,i.chany.c- a leg
for that kind of lmk. So that i" how it is with vour
music! Marian, thi1o is the magi&lt;. of art that we read
about so ouch in hooko.."

"Don't talk like that!" I cried angrih.  \"ou, OUrs«:lf,
don't sing just for ,·our ,alan. but became it is a source
of pleao;urc and satii,faction to ,ou. \\'h, do ou mock
me ahd yourself? I think it ii, cruel."
"\Tush I" said Marian, "or he will become angry."
Muoth looked at me. "I shan't be angr,. He is quite
right, really. Bur vou can't feel .,o bad about your leg,
49
otherwise music-making would not be such a co'°pensa­
    </p>
    <p>
     tion to yoq. You arc a contented sort of person. Anything
can happ.cn to you and you nill remain contented-but I
would never h.a,ve believed ft."
He sprang angrily to hi feet. '"And it isn't true. You
set he A,c;i.lanche Song to music; that was no' indkation
of consolation and satisfac-tion-but of despair. Listen I"
'suddenly he went to the piano, and it became quieter
in the room. He began to play, made a mistake, then
omitted t introduc.tion and sang the song. He now
sang it difterentl from the wa he d.ad o,ung it at my
rooms, and I rould tell that he had sung it often. sinc-c
then. He now sang it aloud in the deep baritone 'voi&lt;.e
which I had heard from the stage, :nd thcr4!itrength and
intense feeling in hi ·mice made one forget the unrt'lieved
distress of the song.

"This man saS he wrote that purely for pleasure. He
doe1n't know anlhing about de'tpair and is pcrfcctl
&lt;.ontented with hi lot! " he criNl and pointed hi hngcr
at me. There were tears of \hame and anger in my Cell.
    </p>
    <p>
     I saw everything through a mi5it, and in order to end it
I stood up to go.

Then I felt a o,mooth but strong hand prC5ili me hat k
into the armc-hair and gcnth stroke my hair. There Wl'l'e
beads of perspirc11ion on my brow; m, eyes were dmcd
and I held bac.k my tears with difficulty. Looking up, I
saw Heinrkh Muoth standing in front of me. The others
did not appear to have observed the whole enc c1nd
my agitation. They were drinking. wine and lauging.
"You are a child," .aid Muoth softly. "When a gian
writes songs Jike those, he should be beyond that linli
of thing. But, I am sorry I find a penon whom I like
50

and we have hardly been together at all when 1 gin
to pick a quarrel with him.t'
"Oh, all right," I said pith embarraswncnt, "buJ I
should like to go home now. The be&lt;,t part of the even­
ing is finis\Jcd.''
    </p>
    <p>
     "Very well, I will not pres11 OU to stay. The rei.t of
us will have another drink vet, I think. Would OU
mind seeing Marian home? ',he bvei. on the inner side
of the moat: it i" not ouL of ,our way."
The prelt\ WIJll,m looled at him 01rioui.l for a
moment. Then 11he turned to me and said. "\\'ill Ou?"
I sai: "WiLh plcd11urc," dnd !lLOO&lt;I up We ouh sdid
good-bye Lo Muoth I In the anteroom a !lt.n ant helped
U'&gt; on with olfr co,m; thtn the httlc old \\orndn clJ&gt;pedred
sleepilv and took U!I through the gJ.rden to the gate by
tl· la,,t of ,t lclrgc l,mtern. ·1 he \\ind Wd, 'ltill warm
and lclTe'l,i.ag, it drew cllong mJ.'&gt;'SC'&gt; of blJcL doudi, ,md
11tirrcd the top., of the bare lr&lt;.'t.'&gt;

I did uot ,cnlllre to offe1 \1Jrtc1n· m, arm, but she
tool it l' .,.,Led. br&lt;·Jthed m till. rught au ,uth her head
thrown b.tck and looLed up J.t me l011qmringh and
trU'ltfulh I 'ltlll '&gt;ecmcd to fed he1 .,oft hclnd on m,
bah-. he WcllLtd .,Iowh J.11d .,t'cmtd to \\J.nt to lead me.
    </p>
    <p>
     "There drc t.db'&gt; mer tht.re, · I 11,.ud, for it was painful
to mC' th,H ,he '&gt;hould .ulclpt hu ,df to m, l.ime wall and
it mclde me 11ufft.-r to hcl,c to hmp bt"-,1dc this \\JJ:lll,
healthv, '&gt;lender 'M&gt;tndn
"I.et ui. wall J. httlc," 'lht· .,,ml ',he tool.. care to walk
vc-1yei.lo\\h, J.ml if l held h.ul m, ,,c1,. I .,hould ha,e
r.na.n her '&gt;lill clo'lel to mc But I \\,\'§ hlled with 110
much pain clnd anger that I rdlJ.11l'd ht·r clRll, and when
11hc looLed at me with '!.,Ul pn,e, 1 ,.ud to her: "It is no
51

good like this. Pardon me, I must walk. alone." She
walked anxiously and sympHhetically by my aide, and I
on,!y lacked an upright walk. and the consciousness of
physical strength for me to have been contrary in every
thi:ig I said and did. I became quiet and ,reserved. I
co11:.ld not do otherwise, or I 11hould have had tears in
mv eyes and longed to feel her hand on my head again.
I 'would have preferred to escape into the next side­
street. I did not want her to walk 'ilowly, to show con­
    </p>
    <p>
     sideration towards me aud to pity ni.e.

"Are you vexed with him?" she said at last.

"No, it was stupid of me. I hardh· I.now him ,,et."
"He upsets me when he is like tJ1at. There re days
when I am afraid of him."
"You, too?"
"Yes. more than anyone. lie hurts no-one more than
himself. He hates himself at time,.'"
"Oh, he puts on a pose.'"
"What did you say?" sbe said startled.
"That he is ari actor. What doc., he want to mock
himself and others for? Wh doc., ht· ha\·e to dr.1w out
the experiences and secrets from a friend and ridicule
them-the miserable wretch I ·
My previous anger found a way into my !tptteh again.
I wanted to insult and disparage this man who had hurt
me and whom I reall· envit.-d. Al'lo my re.,pec·t for the
lady had decreased since she defended him and openly
    </p>
    <p>
     admitted it to me. Was it not already bad enough that
she had been the only woman at thi, bachelors' driail·.ing­
party? I was used to little licence iu these things, and .1
was ashamed to have a earning for this pretty woman
just the same. I preferrf'd in my vexation to start a
51

quarrel with her rather than eel her pity any longer.
If she thought me rude and ,eft me, it would be better
than her staying and being kJnd to me.
But she put her hand on my arm. "tcp," i,he cried
warmly, so 9that her voice moved me de'ipite myM"ll;
"don't i.ay any more! What i'i the matter with you?
Muoth wounded lOU with two or three word., bec.ause
you were not skilful or c.ouragcom enough to defend
younrlf, and now th,il OU h,ne left, OU attac.k him in
hateful language il\front of me. I ought to let ,ou walk
alone!"

"A., you wi'lh. I onl '&gt;c1id whc11 I thought."
    </p>
    <p>
     "Don't lie' Ynu a«1=pted hi'&gt; im ttation and lOU plaved
OUr mmic t&lt;1 him. You ,c1w hem he liked Jl, how it
plec1'ied OU and c.hccrcd ,ou up. And now, beause ,ou
.i.re 'lfli,'\' and can't hl·ar to ht·c1r a \\Ord .i.hout him, ,ou
1,cg.n to m111t him You ,houldn't do that, and I will
put i down to the winr ,nu h.n &lt; had "

It c1ppcared to me th,tt .,a· ,mldenlJ r,th&lt;,ed how things
wc1c with r .c 111&lt;I th,ll it \\,h 1101 the \\Ille th,tt hadc,c.itcd
me; i,he h .. nged her tone c1lthough l did not male the
i,lightc:.t c1ttcmpt to , mdic ,tic 111\ '&gt;df I \\ .1, ckfcucelc1,.,.
"You don't lno\l. \tuoth l&lt;"l," ,ht· commucd. "\on
ha,e heard him sin. hc1,cn't \OU? I h.11 h \\hdt he is
Jilc, fierce and ,iolent, hut mo.,th a.un..t him1,cl. He
11, an cmotinn.1I man; he ha-, gre.1t , igour hut no gol.
At even moment he would lile to t.t,te the \\hole world,
and whatever he ha'I and whc11e,er be doc,, onh c.on.,ti
tuteii.m infinite,;im.11 part of it. He cir ink-, and is never
druP!; he h.u, women .md h, neH'I h,tpp,: he sings  .h magm c.entl and Ct doci, not w.mt to b1.. In artist. If
he m .. e1, amone, he bur him. lie pretends to despise
    </p>
    <p>
     53

all who ¥C contented, but it is really hau against
himself because he does not know contentment. That
it what.he is like. And he Jtas shown friendship towards
.you, as much as he is capable of doing."
J maintained an obstinate silence.

:Perhnps you don't need him," she began again, "you
have other friends. But when we see someone suffer and
being ill-mannered became of his suffering, we ought to
be indulgent and forgh·e him.·

Yes, I thought, one should do, an&lt;J,.graduall the walk
in the night cooled me down. and although m own
wound was still open and required to be healed 1 was
induced to thin!.. more .md more aflout what Marian had
said and about m, ,tupi&lt;l behaviour that \!vening. I felt
that I wai-a mi11cr.1ble creature who really owed an
apology. After the effe&lt; L of thc-wine had worn off, I had
    </p>
    <p>
     an uncomfortable freling agaimt which I fought. I did
not i-&amp;" much morc-to the prett, woman, who now i-eemoo
agitated and m&gt;0d her\t·lf a11t i-he waU..&lt;"d hc·,idc mt'
along the dark 11trect11t where, here and tht·r&lt;', the light
of a lamp wa, ,;uddenlv rcfl'Cted on the d.irk 11urf.ic.e of
the wet ground. It occurred to me that I had left Ill
violin in fuoth''i hou..e; in 1he meantime, I wa&lt;, again
filled with a'itonhhment and al.irm at e\.en thing. The
evt:ning had turned out to be so different from what I
had anticipated. Henri&lt;.h Muoth and K.ra111l the ,iolinin,
and al!ltO the radiant Marian, who played at being queen.
had all climbed down from their pedestals. They were
not godi-or saint'i who dwelt on Olmpian heigh1::, but
mere mortalr,; one wa'i 'imall and droll, anothc was  oppressed aud U&gt;DCited, Muoth was wretched and self-
tormented, the charming woman was pathetic and mi11er-
54

able as the lady-&amp;iend of a ttulas senr,uali\t who Lnew
no joy, and y'"t she was gooc and kind and acquainted
with suffering. I. my\Clf, fel, changed, wait no longer 1f'
    </p>
    <p>
     single person, but a part of dll people, -.ee;ng good ,md
bad featur in .all. I felt I c.ould not Im c.-a prnon h&lt;'W"'
and hate another pcriton there. I \\ .10, d\h,uucd o m ld'-1.
of undC'r\Landing ,md \dW de.irlv tor the 110,t time in my
young life that one could not go through hfe dud among!tt
people so i,imply, hating one pe1.,on .ind loving dnother,
re'lpttting one person and de'lpi.,ing dnother, but all.
the .. e emotiom ,H·e , Im,·h necl up, hdtdh ,;eparable
dnd at time., hardh J1,ting1mh,1hle I looked dl the
woma,i wallm h\ 'V' .,idc who ''"" now al'lo silenr as
if &lt;,he too 1eaf1'lt'd thc1t the natur1; of m.1m, thing wai,
different hoan what &lt;,he hdd rhought ,,md \dUI
At la.,t \\C 1c.1ch,·cl her hou&lt;,e 'ihe held out her hand
to rne, wlmh I g&lt;"ntlv pre., .. ed .md li..ed. "Sleep well'"
r,he id kindh but without a smile

I did. too I went homt and to bro: I L.now not how,
fell a'lleep · m, 1ed1atch .uul lept fd1 into the net morn
ing. Tht.  ro\e liL.e the llldll in the Jad.-in-the-box, did
mv cx.eru,c.,, .111d wa11hed and drc11!Kd m,'IClf It was
    </p>
    <p>
     onlv when I .,aw nn coat h.mgiug on the c-hair and
m,.,r;ed m v1olin-ca\C, that I thouht of the previom
d,1, Meantime, I h.id slept wc.-11 and felt better I could
not linl up the thoughb I had had the previous night.
There onlv remained 'lmc1ll, &lt;,U.inge, m\\,ud e,penenies
an Dl memorv, .ind a fcehng of .. urpti.,t th.u I \\a'I 'ltdl
und1anged and the i,amr d., c,c1

I 1t1anted to wm L. but 1m , iohn ,, ,l, not there So I
went out, .it hri,t 1ne..0 1uteh, then wuh d1termination
in the dirt.'&lt;.tion I h.1d gone ,eterd.l, and arrhed at
55

Muoth's house. Even from the garden-gate I hejtrd him
singing. The dog sprang me and was led away with
.ijfficulty by the old womaq who had quickly come GUI.
She allowed ,ue to go in. I told her l only wanted to
';a&amp;ch my violin and did not want to disturfi' the gentle­
man. MJ· violin-c:ai.e was in the anteroom and my violin
WilS in the case. My music had also Leen put there.
    </p>
    <p>
     Muoth must haYe done that; he had thought about me.
He was singing aloud dose h. I could hear him walking
quietly up and down as if wearing ,flippers. Al times
he would strike keys on the piano. His ,oicc sounded
clear and bright. more powerful than I h,ul ever .heard
it at the theatre. lie was practiling a rt,lc that was
unknown to me. He repeated parts of i a number of
times and walked quickly up and down the room.

I had taken my thing-. and was going to kave. I felt
quite calm and hardh aff ectcd by the memorv of the
previous day. But I was curious to 1;ee him and to know
whether he had. changed. I went nearer, and almost
involuntaril I put my hand on the handle, turned it
and stood in the open doorway.

Muoth turned round while i.inging. Ht· wa, i11 a shirt,
in a very long. fine, white 11hirt and look&lt;·d fn· .. h, as if
he had just had a bath. Too late I took fright that I
had surprised him like that. However, ht o,eemed neither
    </p>
    <p>
     sul'prised that I had rnme in without knocking nor
embarrassed because he wai. not dressed. Jui.t a1; if
everything was pcrfettly normal, he held out bis hand
and asked: "Have OU had breaUai.t YN?" Then.. a, I
said: "Yes," he sat down by the piano.

"Shall I !Jing my part? Listen to th,· aria I It is a
mixture! The opt·ra is to he ivcn at the Royal Opera
56
House with Buttner and Duclli ! But that doesn't
interest you, or me, really. I-low are you? Have you
had a good rest? You did1 t look so well wlcn yoy.
left last night. And yo11 were anno·ed 't'ith me, too.
Anyway, we,won't start that nonscnrre agaiu now."
And straight away, without giving me a chan,c to say
anything, he said: "You know, Krantl i, a nuisance.
He won't play your sonata."

"But he playt.-d it yesterday."
    </p>
    <p>
     "I mean at a concert. I wanted him to take it on, but
be won't. It woufc:1 ha\·e been grand if it had been
included in say, a matinee concert next winter. Kranzl
isn't a" fool, OU knw, but he is la,·-He i, alwa·s
playing Russii:ft1 musk by 'imky' aml 'ow'ikf. He doc,n't
like learning anything new."

"T :lon't think," I began, "that the sonata is suitable
for a concert and I nc.-vcr had that in mind. It is ,till
not f\awless technically."

"That's nonsense! You and your thnil"alit.ies! \\'c
arc not SC"1 K -teachcri. and without douht \\ orse thing-.
will be pl .. Jed, e\cn by Kran.d. But I J..nnw different!·.
You must give mc-the song and writc-i.nmc more soon I
I am leaving here in the pring. I ha,c handed in my
resignation aud am going on a long holida,. during
which I want to gi,·c one or rwo concerts, bm with
something new, not Sdmbc-rt, \\'olf and Lowe and the
others that we hear e,·cry evening. I want at least one
    </p>
    <p>
     or two new and unknown picct·s of mmic, -.ul·h as the
Anl.w1chc Song. What do you think:-"

The prospect of my song, being sung in puhlk by
l\.f uoth was like a gatcwr.y to the future thro,.gh the bars
of whkh I could set splendid ,·ii.1.1s. For that \'cry reason ... :, '
I wanted to be cautious and neither abuse Muotb'1
kindness or bind myself ,-o him too much. it seemed
-to me 1hat he wanted to ,draw me to him forcibly, to
dazzle me aqd in some way overpower me. Therefore
'-,,hardly committed myself .

. "I will see,'" I said. "You arc ,cry kind to me, I
ali,ie that, but I cannot promise am thing. I am at
the end of my 11tudics and mn,t now think about good
testimonials. Whether I sh.i.11 ever mal..e ID way as a
composer is uncertain. Meantime, 1. am a violinist and
must try to obtain a po11ition MlOn.''

"Oh, yes, you can do all that. But OU may tb,ink of
    </p>
    <p>
     another song like tbat one, which, 1ou can lf't me have.
Will you?"
"Yes, of course, although I don't know why you take
11uch an interest in me.'"

"Arc vou afrJ.id of me? I simph· lil..e ,our music. I
should like to sing some more of Our 'iOnlrJ and look
forward to doing so. It i,; pure &lt;'goi'lm."
"All right, but whv did ,ou IJ.ll.. to me as OU did
yestercla ?"

"Oh, you are still offended I What did I reall sa,? .
I no longer remember. Amwa,, I didn't iniend to treat
you roughl, a\ I i,eem to have done. But ,ou can defend
y6urself! One tall..s, and e,ery per..on i, .1, he is and
ai, he must be, and people have to a«ept each other.''
"That's what I think, but you do ju'llt the oppo,;ite.
You provoke me and do not accept what I 11ay. Yon
draw out of me things that I don',t want to thinka"tbout
mi,elf J.nd that are m affair, and throw them bal.. in
    </p>
    <p>
     my face lik.t a reproach. You even mocl.. me about my
stiff leg."

Heinrich Muoth said slowly: "Well, well, people are
different. One man is wild if you tell him the truth,
and another can't bear it if &gt;"f,u say nothing. You were
annoyed because I didn' tr:at you with false ;espect
and I was avnoyed because you were on the defensive;,
and tried to delude me with fine phrases about t4e solace
of art."

"I meant what I said, only I am not uo,ed to talking
about these things. And I won't talk about the other
matter either. How things seen, to me, whether I am o;ad
or in despair and h8w my leg came to be irtjurt-d, I want
to keep to myself, and I don't want to let anyone drag
them oftt of me and mc&gt;&lt;.k me about them."
He stood uia

"1 haven't anything on yet. I'll go and get dreued.
    </p>
    <p>
     You'rr a good fellow. I'm not, I know. \Ve won't talk
:i.boul lt 110 auuch again. Jlao;n"t it occurred to ou that I
like ?U? Just wait a little. Sit down by the piano until
I'm dressed. IJo you sing?-- No?-- Well, I'll only
be a few 1v:.11,tes:· · ·

He 1001 .eturned dre'i'lled from the adjoinin!{ room.
"We'll go into town now and have a meal," he said
lightly. He did not a.,J.. whether it mited me. He said:
·wen go," and we \\ent. For however much his manner
annoyed me, it imprc .. d me: h,. was the 'ilronger char­
acter of the two. At the -.ame time, he displa·ed a
whimsical, childlike dispoo;ition in hi, comersation alid
behaviour which was of ten charming and which quite
won rue o,·er.

Frqpi that time I saw Muoth often. He frequently
set me tickets for the op--ra. 'l&lt;lmetimes im·it me down
to play the violin, and i I did not like eventhing about
59
    </p>
    <p>
     him, there were little things he did not like about me.
A friendship was eistablishfd between us, at that time my
,_poly ooe, and I almost bey,an to fear the time when he
would no looger be there. He had in fact handed in his
,esignation and could not be pre11ised to st."lY, despite a
nu111ber,of request11 and induet:J:llents. At times he hinted
t4at there might be a part for him at a large theatre in
the autumn, hut it wa .. not et arr.angcd. In the mean­
time spring arrived.

One da I went to Muoth's hou.,e for the la,t gentle­
men's gathering. \\'e drank to our nh.t meeting ,md the
future, and thi11 time theie wa,; no wom,m pre .. cnt. Muoth
accompanied us to the garden-gate, earh in the rriorning.
He waved u,; farewell and I&lt;'turned sh:,&lt;'ring in the
morning mi11t to hi., alre,uh half-emptied room.,, a,rom­
panied by the leaping ,md b,u ling do It S&lt;'emed to
me that a section of m, life .u1tl experience had now
ended. I felt I .Loew Muoth \\ell enough to be sure that
    </p>
    <p>
     he would 1100n forget u-, all, and onh now did I 'lt'e
dearly and unmi11take.1hh ho mulh I had lil,d this
moody, imperious man.

The time for ID dcp.irture had al!IO arrhro. J madt'
m Ian ,i11it., to pi.ire., .incl to p&lt;·ople whom I would
remember lindh. I alo,o \\ent on« mm&lt;· up to the hil{h
road and looked down .it the ,lope, \\hich I would not
indeed forget.

I set off home to an unknown and ,1pp,nt·111h ,minter­
esting future. I had no 'lituation nJ&lt;I I rnuld not gh·e
independent c.onc.ertis. At homt· thtre onh dWaitfP me,
to mv d1,mal, -,ome studento, \\ho \\antcd "iolin l..oni..
To be sure. Ill p.1relll'!t c1lo a\\,lit&lt;·d me .ind they were
rich enough to &lt;,ee th.it I did not \\ ,mt for am thinK,
60

also tactful and kind enough not to press me and a-.J..
what w,H to be&lt;.ome of me But right from the beginning
    </p>
    <p>
     I k.ncw that I i,hould not he Ihle to endure it he1e lontt ..
There is not much for 111e fo say about tqe ten months
that I spent at home. During rhh time I gave lesson-. tJ;a,,
three studet'i, and de'ipitc. everHhing wa\ n!t reall
unhappy. People lived here al,;o· things hdppened here
also every day, but I onh had" feeling of poliLe indifler­
enc.e row,1rd1i C\Cr thmg On rhc other hand, I secretlv
apenenc.ed strang&lt;', entunc.ing hours wnh music, when
my whole way ot h seemed 101 p1d dud remote, .md only
a hunger for 10u,;1c. rem,uned, which often tormented
me un'bearabh durmg th«· \ 1ohn le1i\OU'i and certainly
mdde me a lwd tcac'1t.r But ,1fterward1,, when I had
fulfilled m, obhgc1uom or hdd c\cldcd m, le'i'ions w1th
cunning and eMU-.C'i. I relapo;ed mto a v.onderful dream­
like-11tdtc Ill v.hich I hmlt bold o,ound &lt;.-d1bct,, erected
m,1gnihcent &lt;d'&gt;tlcs m th&lt;. dlr, r.w,c.d .ircheo, Cd'itms; long
\hctdos, dnd created mu.,H .al p.atterm, " light ,md
delicate a'&gt; o, '&gt;-hubhll.'i

\\ihilst &lt;.nt about m .i ,;tatt of 'itupefaction and
    </p>
    <p>
     ab\01ption \\lmh drme .1v.a\ m, p1c,1ou&lt;i companions
.ind orried m\ p.irents, the dammed up ,;prmg \\ithin
me buro,t forth even mote forc1bh c1nd p1ofu!ll"h than it
h.id done the pre\ 1ou, , ear m th, mount am,; ·1 he f1 mts
of 'SCCminqh lo&lt;it , &lt;"Jro, durm v. h1ch I had v. orl..ed and
drc.imcd, \uddcnh r1penc·d c111d ft"II .,ofth c1nd genth,
one ,tfttr the othet Tht', ,Hre 'i\\t'l't .md fr.1rc1nt, the,
i,urrounded me. m .ilmoi,t o,e1v.hclmmg abundance, and  I p1&lt;.ul them up v.uh he1,1t.it.on and m111trmt It began
v.,1h ,l \ong, then follc\\cd .i , 10hn f.int-1,\ta, then a
i,trmg quartet, c1nd when after a fev. momho; I had
tu

composed some more songs and several symphonic themes.
I felt that. it was all only the beginning and an attcmpL
..Znwardy. I had visions et a great symphony; in my
wildest momnts I even thotight of an opera. Meanwhile, -"°m time to time I wrote polite letters to COlductors and
th«:_atres, ,enclosed copies of testimonials from my teachers
and humbly asked to be remembered for the next
cancy for a violinist. Then came short, polite replies
which began: "Dear Sir";-sometimcs there were no
    </p>
    <p>
     replies, and there was no promise of an appointment.
Then for a day or two I felt insignif,cant and retreat&lt;.-d
into myself, gave con!ICientious lt'5SOns and wrote further
polite letters. When I was alone, I again immeliiately
felt that my ht"ad was still full of n\usic tl11\l 1 wantt&gt;d to
write down. Hardly had I begun again when the letters,
theatres, orchc,tra'I, comlucton and "Dear Sir," fadl-d
away from my thoughts and I found lll"1»clf fully occupied
and contented.

But these arc memories that one cannot properly
describe, like most recollection... What a p&lt;"r1«&gt;n really
is and CXpt"rience'I, how he dc,clop and mature, grows
feeble and dieo,, is reallv all indc..c rib.tble. The li,·es of
ordinary working people are boring, hut tht" activities
and destinies of idlero, arc intt"re'lting. llowt&gt;ver rich
th.tt period remains in m mcmon, I cannot \ay anything
about it, for I remained apart from or&lt;linan· ,ocial life.
Only once, for moment. did 1 again coml' &lt; loser to a
person whom I will not forget. He wa, a teacher callt"d
    </p>
    <p>
     Lobe.

One day, late in the autumn, I went for a wat. A
modest viii suburb had arisen on the south side of the
town. No rich people dwelt in the small, inexpcmive
61
houses with their neat gardens, but respectable middle­
clasa families and people who lived on small incomes.
A clever young master-buildfr had erected a mvnber  ·
attractive houses here which I was intqested to see.
It was a arm afternoon. Here and there, !lUts bar!
fallen belately from the trees; the small new hvuses and
gardens were clearly outlined in the sunshine. They
were of a simple de11ign that appealed to m&lt;'. I looked
at them with the superficial inrcrc-1t rhat 'oung people
have for these thin15, when thoughts of hu!IC, home and
family, rest-days and holidays arc 'lilill remote. The
peaceful streets with their gardens made a very pleasing
impression on me. I strolled along 'lilowl. and as I was
walking, I happened To read the name of the &lt;x·cupier of
    </p>
    <p>
     the house on a small bright bra,.s-plate on the garden­
gar«·

··he nc1m,. "Konrad Lohe" was on the .,mall brass
plate, and a, I read it, the name seemed familar to me.·
I stood still and reftected. Then I i:emembered thc1t that
was the r ,rru of one of the teachers at the Grammar
School. 1-.,r a few moments, the past rose before me, con­
fronted 1m· with surprise, and :a ma of faces, Leathers
and friends, memorie ol nkkname ,md storie'li danced
before me in fteeting wnes. As I tood there looking at
the brass-plate, a man ro\C from behind a nearln &lt; urrant­
bush where he had been bt&gt;nding down while 'M.orkig.
H&lt;" tame forward and looked at me.

"Did you want me?"' Ill' c1sked, and it wa11 Lohe, the
tea&lt; -r whom we used to ,·all Lohengrin
"f"ior really,"' I said c1nd 1aised m hat. "I did not
kTaow that OU lh·ed h ... rc. I u,;ed to bl vne of ,·our
scholars."
    </p>
    <p>
     He looked at me more keenly, observed my stick,
reflected a moment and then pronounced my name. I le
had not remembered ftly  ace, but my atift leg, for he
naturally knew about my accident. Tben he asked me
to come in.

His shirt-sleeves were rolled up and he was wearing a
gr&amp;!en gardening apron. He did not seem to have grown
older and looked wonderfully well. We walked through
the small, neat garden, then he led me to an open
veranda, where we sat down.
"Well, I would never ha,e recognised OU," he said
candidly. " hope your memory o me has been a kind
one ...

"'Not entire!, .. 1 .,aid lJughing: 11\,oU ,,nee puni&lt;1hcd
me for something I did not do and det lc1red my protes­
tations of innocence to bt lieh. It wa-. in 1he fourth c.la-.,."
He looked up with a 1rouhled expr&lt;''&gt;'&gt;ion on his face.
    </p>
    <p>
     "You muht not hold it again'&gt;! me. I Jill V&lt;"ry sorry.
With all the good intention., in th&lt;' world, it rontinually
happens wirh teac hen that something goe,; wrong and
an act of inju.,tke i., rnmmittecl. I know of wor&amp;e ca'iC'&gt;.
That is one of the rea..on., wh, I l&lt;'ft."
"Oh, aren't ,ou '&gt;till teaching?"

"Not for a long time now. I b."f .unc ill. and when I
recovered, ml view., had lh,mged "° much that I resignro.
I tried to be a good tcadu.r, hut I wa&lt;1n't one; ,ou have
to be born to it. o I gave it up and since 1hen I have
felt better ...
I could &lt;1ee that I l'nquired further, but he wJ.r11ed to
hear my story, wlii&lt; h wa,; soon 1ofd. He wa, noi_ alto­
gether ple"'-d that I had becom&lt;" a mll'li&lt; ian. On t'lic
other hand, he &amp;bowed uncommon -.ympathy, whic.h did
fj4

not make me feel too sensitive, in regard lo my ill-luck.
He discreetly tried to discover how I had succeeded in
    </p>
    <p>
     finding consolation, and was .ot t.itisfied with m1 half­
evasive answers. With mysterious gesticulations, he inti­
mated hesiingly and yet unreservedly, with much
halting circumlocution Lhat he knew of a so\ace, of
complete wisdom which was there for every earnest
seeker.

"J know," I said, "oU mean the Biblt"."
l\,Jr. Lobe smiled mystcriou-1 The Bible is good; it
is the way to knowlfdge, hut it is not knowledge itself."
"Well, when is knowle&lt;lge itself?"
"You will find ii easily if you wi!ih to. I will give you
something to rAld that gives the principles of it. Have
you heard of the sLudy of Karma?"'
"Karma? No, what is it?"

Hhl will find out. Just wait a minute!" He went
away and as absent for a short time while I sat there
surprised, not knowing what to &lt;'xpect, and looked down
the garden wl&gt;t"re diminutive fruit-tt'ees' stood in faultless
    </p>
    <p>
     rows. Af ·· a short time, Lobe returned. He looked at
me with a h&lt;"am on his face and handed me a small book,
whid1 bore in th&lt;" middlr of a m,;terious symbolic pat­
tern. the title of .. Thlmophiill CateC'hism for B«-ginners."
"rake Lhat with you!· he said. "You ma· keep it and
if you want to study further, I can l,·11&lt;1 you some more
books. This one is only an introduc·tion. I owe every­
thing to these teachings. I ha,e become well in body and
soul thfough them ancl hope 1he will do the same for
you."

f took the small book and put it in my pocket. The
man accompanied me through the g:\rden down to the
C
road, took friendly leave of me and asked me to come
again soon. I looked at his fat.e, which was good and
happy, and it seemed to nl,e that there could be no harm
. in trying th path to such happiness. So I went home wilh
the little book in my pocket, curious about,the first steps
along t!iis path to bliss.
    </p>
    <p>
     ·vet I only embarked upon it after a few days. On my
teturn home, the call of music was again powerful. I
threw myself into it and lived in a world of music. I
wrote and played until the storm within me was apain
silenced and I could return c.almly to t"verv-day life.
Then I immediately felt the need to study the new
teachings and sat with the little book in front of me
which I thought I could soon absorb.

But I did not find it so easy. The little book became
massh·e in my hand'i and finally seemed unfathomable.
It began with an interesting introduction cm the many
paths to wisdom to which cverOllC had accc'i"Jt, and the
theosophical brotherhood which stood independently
for knowledge and inner perfection, in which e\'t'ry faith
was respected and e\'CJ'' path to tht light was welcom&lt;".
Then followed a cosmology which I did not undrruand,
a division of the world into different "plan&lt;...,", and
history into remarkable ages unknown to me, in which
    </p>
    <p>
     the lost countl' of Atlanti, was. also induded. I left this
for a time and turned to the other chapters where the
doctrine of reincarnation was prc11cntcc:I, which I under­
stood better. Yet it was not quite dear to me whether it
was all mythology and poetic fal?lei., or whether .it was
to be taken literally. It seemed to me to be the latter,
which I could not accept. Then came the teachings
about Karma. It appeared to me to he a religious
66

interpretation of the law of causality, which was not
unattractive to me. And so on. I soon realised that
these teachings could only "e of solace and value to . r  those who could accep them literally, nd smcerely
believe thC!Ji to be true. If, as they were to me, partly
beautiful literature, partly intricate symbols, an, attempt
at a mythological explanation of the world, one could be
instructed by them and hold them in esteem, but one
could not learn how Lo live and gain strength from them.
One could perhaps be a worthy and religious theosophist,   but the final solace only beckoned to those who accepted
simple beliefs without Loo much questioning. In the
    </p>
    <p>
     meantime, it was not for me.

All the sanw, I welh to see the teacher several more
times. Twelve years' ago we ha&lt;l plagued each other with
Greek, and now, in quite a different way, equally unsuc­
c.'-,sht1 y, he tried to be my teacher and guide. We did
not beco111c: close friends, but I lik\!d going to see him,
and 'for a time he was the onl p&lt;'fSOn with_ whom I
discuss&lt;'d important ao;pccts of 111, Ufc-. I did indeed
realise t'  all thi'i talk was of no value and at its best
only led to clever phr.tses. Yet I found him soothing
and worthy of reverence, this devout man who had
coolly renounced dmnh and knowledge and who in the
latter half of his life experienced the peace and glory of
religion through naive beliet in remarkable, subtly
reasoned teachings.

Despite all endeavours on my part, this path has
alway1 been closed to me. Yet I have a great leaning,
\\hiclJ is not reciprocc1ted, towards religious people who
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter four
    </head>
    <p>
     a fortified and gain pea,·e through one faith.or another.






:Ouring the short period of my visits to the pious theoso
phist and fruit-grower, I on&lt;' day received a smdll t he,1m·,
the reason for which was a nnstery to me. It had ben
C sent to me by a well-1..nown north-German t·ont"l'I t .u;ent
with whom, howevt'r, I had never had am· dealings. On
making enquiries, I received the reply that this amount
had been forwarded to me by order 06 Mr. Heinrich
Muoth. He had sung a song composed b\" me at ,ix
concerts, and this sum represented 1m fee.
I then wrote to J\.fuoth, thanked him and asked for
news. Abo,e all, I wanted to J..now how 1m 11ong bad
been received at the concerts. I had heard about Muoth's
recitals and had seen notices about them once or twice
    </p>
    <p>
     in the newspapers. Of cour11e, I dill not· cxpt-ct to Sl't
anything about my 110ng. I wrote to him about my
activities and work in minute detail, a11 11olitary people·
often do, and also endosed one of m, new song!I. Then
I waited for an answer. As I had 11till rcct&gt;ivcd none after
four weeks, I forgot all about th&lt;' whole matter again.
Almost every day, I still wrote mmk, whkh haunted
me like in a dream. During the intenals. however, I felt
limp and discontented. I ver .much di11likcd ,S{iving
lessons and felt I could not endure it much lngl.-r.
I therefQTe felt that a curse wa11 lifted from me whcn
I finally received a letter from Muoth. He wrote:
68

Dear Mr. Kuhn,
I am no letter-writer. I did not answer your
letter as I did not reatly know what to s,y. But
now I can put forward concrete proposals. I am
now clngagecl at the Opera House here in R. and
I should be pleased if OU could also come here.
    </p>
    <p>
     You rnuld, in the fir\t plac&lt;', obtain a position
here a&lt;i a set.ond violiniist. The c.ouduc tor is an
inteJligcnt, frank man, even though &amp;omcwhat
abrupt. Yo .. would probably also soon have an
opportunity to play &amp;ome of Our music.. We have
good chamber tonccrt&amp; here. I also have some­
thing to tell yu about your songs; one thing is
that thAc is a publi!th&lt;'r whr wants to have them.
But writing i'I such a bore. It would be better if
vou c.amc. Come quickly and wire me about the
po.,ition.

Ycmrc,,
Muoth.
I a, r',u ,uddenh dr.1gged .twa, from m unprofi­
table an. ,1ermit'i, exi'lteuc.&lt;' I wa'I again drawn into the
stream of life. had hopes and &lt; areis, &amp;orrows and joys.
Tllt're wa'i nothing to lc-ep me. and my parents were
glacl to sec me take m,· first ddmite step in my career
in life. I sent a wire without dda,, and three da·s later
    </p>
    <p>
     I was already in R. with Muoth.
l had ohtain&lt;'d auommodation in a hotel. l.went'to
visit Muoth but did uot find him in. Then he came to
my hetd and unexpectedly stood before me. He held
oit Hs hand, asked me no qut'!ttions. did not tell me
anything and did not s'iare my excitement ill the sligh­
test. He was used to Jetting him'IClf be drawn along by
6g

events, only experiencing and taking the presen moment
seriously.· He hardly gave me time to change my clothe
and thin took me to see dossier, the conductor.
"This is Mr. Kuhn," he said.
Rossler nodded. "How do you do! What t'an I do for
you?"

· "He is the violinist," cried Muolh.
The conductor looked at me with 11urpri. turned to
the singer again and said rndel: "\'ou didn't tell me
that the gentleman wa'i lame. I mt't h,n·t-people with
    </p>
    <p>
     straight limbs."

The blood rose lo mv face but Muolh remain t'alm.
He just laughed. "Do ,ou wa111 tiim 10 d.mc e, Ros'ilcr?
I thought he was to pla, the ,·iolin. If h can't do that,
we must send him away again. But le-t us hear him first."
"Very well. gentlemen. --Mr. Kuhn. t'ome and sec
me tomorrow monting about nine o'c lcx l., here in my
rooms. Are OU anno,cd al what I ,airl about the foot?
Well, Muoth viould have told me about it. .\nway,
we shall 'iCe. Till tomonow ! "
As we went awav, I reproad1ed Muoth about it. He
shrugged his shoulders and 'iaid that if he had mentioned
my infirmity at the beginning, it would ha,e beeri
&lt;lifficult to obtain the conductor·i, rnns&lt;'nt. Now I was
here and if Roii,Ier found me reasonahlv o,atisfactory, I
would soon get to know the better ,ide of hi'i nature.
"But how could OU recommend mc in anv c-a'ie?"
I asked. "You don't even know i I am any good.
"That's your aff'air. I thought OU would be a1r! right
    </p>
    <p>
     -and you will be, too. You're such an unassming
fellow that if someone didn't give you a puiih at times,
you would never get an wber. That was a pu'ih-now
70

you go ahead! You need not be afraid. Your prede.:es­
aor wasn't much good."
We spent the evening in hidrooms. Here agaiq,he had
rented some rooms in a remote district whne there was
a large gar4en and it was quiet. His powerful dog
sprang forward to greet him. We had h:trdly ,at down
and warmed ouneh·&lt;'ll when the b&lt;'IJ was rung and a tall,
very beautiful woman came in and kept us company.
It was the same atmosphere as previousJy, and his lady­
frind was again a i[&gt;lendid, queenly person. He seemed
to take the lovely woman very muc.h for granted and I
looked at this latest lady-love with sympathy, and with
the embarrassinent that I alwayo; felt in the presence of
attractive wo1ften. It wa&amp;, indeed, not without envy.
for with my lame Jeg I wais unloved and without hope of
    </p>
    <p>
     low.

As in thr pa11t, we enjoed omwht·\ and drank a great
deal, at Muoth's. He dominatc·d uo; with his exueme,
but inwardly half-enfor«:d Aaicty, which nevertheless
charmed 11. He &amp;aDA for m enchantinh- and also sang
one of n,, songs. The tlm·«; of m bc.-came very friendly;
a feeling of warmth spread amongst m and drew us
d&lt;&gt;M!. We were natural with each other and remained
close as Jong as the warmth in us endured. The tall
lady, who was called Lottie. W.t'l&gt; friendlv towards me in
a gentle way. It wa!t not the first time that a beautiful
and affectionate woman had treated me in thi sympa­
thetic and e"lttrcmel· confiding wa,. It hurt me this time
too, llut 1 now r«ogniscd this recurrent form of
a, iour and did not take u too much to he.irt. Some-
times I ha,·c even know1. l\omen who haH o;h&amp;wn special
friendship towards me. Tc all regarded me as incapable
71
    </p>
    <p>
     of jealou as of love. That was where the 1,mde1ired
sympathy appec1.red and they confided in me in a halC­
maternat wa,
Unfortunateh, I still had no cpericnre of 11urh affain
and could not lool on the happme,11 of Jove at dose
qua1 ten,, without thmlinl .ibout nn..elf  httlc.-and
fieeling that I should .t.l'IO h.t.ve liL.l'd to indulge in 'IOIDe­
thing ,inul,11 It ,poilt ID plc.-,mne to 'lome extent, but
on the "'hole it "'.i., .i. plt.i,.int C\&lt;nmst m the comp.1ny
of th111 lmeh, L.md lc1.d, .ind the c1.br.i1pt. \tgorou11 nun
who hkt'd me and tooL. .m mtcrc,t m me ,md u·t tould
not i,ho ha., afferuon in ,lll ,hffut.nt "·" d1c1.n he dad
ll.llh women. n,uneh m a lorct.f11l and rnocxh f.i,h1on
,\11 \\C dmLed gl.,.,.,c.., fut tht. 1,1'1 Ullll hefo1c lt'.t\mg.
he nodded to me c1.nd ,.11d "I re,tlh ought to drml to
our good fr1cnd11hip, ,houldtt't I· I ,hould &lt;ertamly
hle to do "° Hut ne, er mmd 11 will he ,tll ruht Just
the ,.i.mc At onl' ttmt., \\ hcne, er I met .m, one.-I hlc-d,
I .tl\\ .1,., c1.ddr6b11ul htm 1mme,h.1tth m .m mtun.ue
f.i11h1011, but It hn I a good thm. le.N of ,tll .1111ong\l
    </p>
    <p>
     c.olle.1gt1c·, I qu.urellul \\llh them 111 JU..t rht .,,mtt "
This time I clad not hd\C th&lt;" h11tc.-1 'l\\&lt;.t l plu,ure of
ha, ing to .1ccompc1.n, m, f11t.ml\ IJ.ch loH home C,he
raimd thtrt. ,md 11 \\,t., btttu -.o I IH 1ournc, the
\i'IJt to Liu. &lt;.onduc.101 the .,u,pt'n'lt ,thoul the followmg
mornmg and the rl'n&lt;.wed .io,.,,x 1.1uon \Uth Muoth h,ul
all doneme good Onh no\\ dad I r.tt ho\\ fmollen, 1ll
at ease ,md remote from peoplt I hc1.d hccomc durmg
mv long, loneh ,ec11 of w,utmg: J11&lt;l \\Ith .i. "Jal'IC of
enJoymeut .1nd health, \uo,peno,e, I \\J.'I .1gc1.m ,deK ,tpd
active ,,m1dng,,t people, ag.1111 h&lt; longmg to the.-world
The next mornml I reporte.,I to Rcml&lt;.r m ood tune
7

I found him in his dressing-gown and with his hair
uncombed, but he made me welcome, and in a friendlier
fashion than the previous da. he invited me to /!lay the
violin, placed hand-written music before me and sat
down by die piano. I played as well as I could, but
reading the badly-written music gave me some trouble.
    </p>
    <p>
     When we had finished, he silently placed another sheet
before me to play without auy accompanu11ent, and
then a third sheet.
:'That's all righi."' he said. "You will l_iave to become
more used to reading the musir; it is not always printed.
Co111e to the theatre tonight. I will make room for you;
then you can play Ur part with the others, who have
meantime fill@c.l he gap when nu..cssary. It will go a
little hard at the hcgi1111i11g. Study the mur.ic well in
ac" ,.,re. Then· is 110 rchcanal toda. I will give you
a note; talt ,. it to the theatre at cle, en o"clock and fetch
the 111usic."

I was not quite crtaiu of mv posjtion, but realised
that this m11, did not like quei,tions, .1.nd I went away.
At the tuc:atre no-one wanted to know an,·thing about
the mu11ic or to lii.ttn to me. I was unused to the machin­
ery there and was discouccrted. I ,;em a 11pl'Cial messenger
to Muoth. He came and immediately everything went
smoothly. In the evening I pl.tec.l for the first time at
    </p>
    <p>
     rhe theatre and was dosely obsencd h the conductor.
The following day I ohtained the appointment.
So strange is the human being thar in the midsr of
my nw life and fulfilled wi!.hes, I was sometimes aware
o a ·light. fleeting, subconsdous desire for solitude, for
even boring and empty c.lavs. It then seen1eto me that
the time I bad suent at home and the dreary unc,·cntful
73

life &amp;om which I was so glad to escape, was spmething
desirable. In particular, I though with real longing
about tlJe weeks I had sped.t in the mountains two yean'
·ago. I felt r.hat I was not destined for well-being and
happiness, but for weakness and oppressido, and that
without these shadows and saaifices, the creative spring
within me was more feeble and turbid. At first there
really was no question of quiet hours and creative work,
and although I was living a full life, I continually
thought I heard the dammed-up ,Jipring within me
whisper softly and complainingly.
    </p>
    <p>
     I enjoyed plaing the violin in the ord1C1,tra. I .poured
over full scores a gr&lt;'at deal and jch m, way longingly
in this field. Slowl, I learned wh.at I hid onl known
theoretic;ally and remotely. n,unel to undcr,tand the
nature, colour and significance of ,ingle ill',trumcnts
from the bottom upwards. At the.· s.une time, 1 studied
ballet mu,;ic and looked forw,lfd with greater ec1rnestne-,s
to the time when I c.onld , enturc to "rite :m opera
myself.

My close relation,;hip with l\luoth, who held one of
the best J&gt;O!iition,; at the Opera Home, facilitated my.
progress and wa,; ven u15cful to me. 1 Wd'I ver SOITh
h9wever, that I did not mal..c am do'5c friends among
my own colleague'§ in the orc.hc,;tra, whit h I would have
liked. Only a first violinist, a Styrian called Teiser, took
an interRSt in me and became nn friend. He wa, ten
years older than I, an honest, 111traightforward man with
a gentle, refined face that easil' t"eddeued. He 1tras an
extraordinarily mmpctcnt musician, and had a particu­
    </p>
    <p>
     larly keen And '§cnsitive car. He wa'I one of tho,;e people
who find 11atitifaction in their art without wanting to
74

play any outstanding part. He was no virtuoso and had
never composed anything. He was content to play the
violin and obtained his greatt.fst pleasure from a f orough
knowledge of technique. He knew every overture in
detail, and lnew as well as any conductor where delicacy
and brilliant playing were nt.-cessary and where the inclu­
sion of an instrume11t prrxluced a beautiful and original
dkct. This made him radiant and he enjoyed himself
more than anyone el&amp;e in the whole theatre. He could
p'-1y nearly all thim,1rument1, M&gt; that I could ask him
questions and learn from him daily.
For many month&amp; we di',, uo;,;ed nothing but technique,
but I liked him and e i.aw that I wao; anxious to learn.
An unspoke1.-unde1&lt;,tandi11g aroo,c between m that did
not fall far short of friendi.hip. Then I finalh told him
a, .. , mv violin ,;onata and ao;ked him to pla it with
    </p>
    <p>
     me some ,: nc. He kindly a,._rr&lt;·ed and came tom, rooms
at the appointed time. In order ro plea&lt;,c him, I obtained
i.ome wine from hio, nati\e town. \\'c drank a gla,;s of
the:-winr tl :n I put up the mu.,ic aud w&lt;· began. He
read the. music ver Wf'll, but 'iuddenl he .,topped and
lowered his bow.

"I i,ay, Kuhn," he &lt;,aid, "this re:-alh· i':i loveh· music.
I don't want to pla, it amhow. I want to take it home
and practii.e it fir.,t. Ma, I?"
"Yes,'' I &lt;1aid. aud when he came again, we played ihe
sonata through twice. When we h.t.d finished, he slapped
me on the shoulder and tried: "You modest creature!
You etencl to be i.m h an innocent and i.t·creth ,ou do
thir,1:,s likc this! I won't say much-I am not a professor,
bt it is beautiful!"
That was the first limp that wmeone in whom I really
75

had confidence had praised my work. I showed him all
    </p>
    <p>
     my wor. including the songs which were just being
publishc;d and which were lfoon to appear. But I did not
· dare tell him.that I was so bold as to think o composing
an opera.
·During those good days 1 was shod..ed by a small
inddent that I can never forget. At Muoth's, where I
was a frequent visitor, I had not seen the pretty woman
called Lottie for some time, but I did not think much
about it because I did not want to '1e&lt;,·ome involved jn
any of his love-affair,;. I preferred uot to know about
them. I therefore did not inquire abour her. Besides,
he never talked to me ahout the thinh.,,.·

One afternoon I sat in 111 mom stmlihg ., ,con·. 8
the window, my blac-k cat la i.leeping in the ,1111,;hine.
The whole house wa,; &lt;1nict. l"IH'n I heard ,omcom·
enter by the front door who wai. stopped and questioned
by the landlady, left her, then &lt; amc and L.n&lt;&gt;&lt; L.td at 111"
door. I went t&lt;&gt; open it and a tall, elcg.uu womJ.n with
a veil over her fJ.u· came in :md do,ed the door behind
    </p>
    <p>
     her. She toot.. a few Mt'p'i into the room. breatlwd deeph·
and then took off her wil. ll w.1,; Lollit. She.· looked
excited and ·1 immcdiateh gueo;,td win· i.hc had come.
AJ,. my request ,;he sat down. She had takc-n m,· hand
but hacl not ,et i.aid amthing. Slit ,ccmed more. at ea,;e
when she oh,c.·n·td 111 cmbarras,;mcnt, a,; if i.he fcar&lt;.'&lt;I
I might bave sent her awav imnw&lt;liatch·.

"Is it about Hcinri&lt; h Muoth ?" I a,;kcd at la,t.
She nodded. "Did ,ou know aflvthing?"
"No. I don't know am thing. It i, only what I though\f"
Sh look&amp;l me in the fau· like a ,ic k per!IOn look,; at a
doct&lt;'l", wu silent and slowly too,j. ofl her gloves. Smldcnh·,
76

she stood up, placed both hands on my shoulders and
ga1.ed at me with her big eyes.
"What shall I do? He is never at home, Jie never
writes to me, he never 6pens my letters I I '1ave not been
able to spelk to him for three weeks. I went there yester­
    </p>
    <p>
     day. I know he was in but he did not open the door.
Not once did he whistle to his dog which had tom my
dress. He doesn't want to know me any more."
"Have you had a quarrel with him?" I asked, so that
I .should not rem n silent.
She laughed. "Quarrel? Oh, we have had enough
c1uarrcls righl from the beginning! I wa'i used to that.
No, he ha11 even bee politt· 10 me lately, whkh I imme­
diately misu\sted. On 011&lt;' occasion he wa'in't there
when he asked me lo come: another time he said he was
, .,u, .. g to st·e me and did not turn up. Fi nail-. he began
to addres., me fonnally. I would ha,·e preferred him to.
beat me again."

I was sunmed "Rt·at you!"
She 1 .111ed again. "Didn't ,ou know. Oh, he has
often beaten me. bm not for a long time now. He has
lit·comc polite; h&lt;' addresses me formally and doe, not
W;Jnt to know nu· any mmc. I cxpt.-ct he has someone
else. That is wh· I ha,·t' come her&lt;'. Tdl me, please!
    </p>
    <p>
     Has he another woman? You know, OU must know!··
Before I rnuld prc\'cnl it, 'iht" took hold of both-my
hands. I wai. a,tounded at "hat -,he had tohl me, but
because l did not wii.h to di'I&lt; m,., it and desired to end
the .:enc, I was almost glad that !&gt;he did not give me a
&lt;Jta1.cc to speak, for l would not h.t\"e known what to say.
Alternately hopdul and 1101Towful, !&gt;he \\'1s contented
that I should listen to 11/r. She ask.t&gt;d me questions. told ... II
me things and burst into fits of weeping. All the time
I looked at her pretty, tearful face and could think of
nothing rise except, "He has beaten ber I" I seemed to
iee his clenched hand, and I shuddc.-red at the thought
of him, and of her, too. After being· beaten, korned and
repulsed, 1he seemed to have no other thought and wish
bbt to return to him and the same humilic1tions.
At last the ftoud i.uhsided. Lottie began to speak more
slowly. She seemed embarrassed and coni.dou,; of the
situation, became silent, and at the i;,"'mc time released
my hands.
    </p>
    <p>
     "There is no-one else," I said gentl, "at least 11ot as
far a,; I am aw.ire."
She looked at me gratefull.
"But I can't help you," I continued. "I never tall.. to
him about such things."

\Ve were both silent a while. I , ould not help but think
of Mc1rian, of prcttl' Mc1ri.m an&lt;l th.tt e"ening when we
had walked arm-in-clJ"m the i.ame night thl' .. outh \\ind
had come. and how she h.id \0 lmc1l1 defended bf'r lover.
Had he beaten her c1l.,o? And did .,ill' '&gt;till punue him?
"\\Thy did you come to me?" I a\l..ed
"I don't know. I had to do ..omething. Do ,ou know
if .he still think,; about me? \'ou are a good man. You
will help me, won't wu? You could c10,l.. him i.ome time,
speak about me ... "
"No, I an't do that. If he !ltill lO\eo, OU, he will come
to OU himi.elf. If not, then . . . "
"Then what?"
    </p>
    <p>
     "Then let him go. He i., not \\orthy that ,ou shuul,t
humble youhelf '.IO much."
Th-reupon she smiled.

"'Oh, what do you know about love! ·
She was right, I thought, but it hurt me just the same.
If love did not come Lo me, if I stood outside, how could
I be taken into anyone's C'onfidence and he of help? I
felt sorry ftfr this woman but I despised her even more.
If that was love, with auclty here and humiliation there,
then it was better to live without love.
"I don't want to argue, ' I ,;aid &lt;0olly. I don't under-
stand this kind of love."

_Lottie fastened on ha veil again.
"Very well, I'm going."
Then I felt sorry for her clgain, but I did not want this
ridiculous scene to be rcp·.1tcd &amp;o I did not &lt;,ay anything.
She walked ttJwards the door and I opened it for her.
I accompanied her pa'&gt;t the inquisitive landlady to the
    </p>
    <p>
     sr:-:, · then I bowed and .,he went awa without sa1ing
anything 11orc anJ without looking at me.
I .looked after her -..1dly and could not tid myself of'
the memory of her for a long time. -Was I really quite
different ro  .1 all these other people, from Marian, Lottie
and Muoth? Was tint really 10\e? I !'law all these
passionate people reel about and drift haph,uardl a,; if
dri,ven by a storm, the man filled with desire toda\,
satiated on the morrow, loving hercely and di!ICarding
brutally, sure of no affection and happy in no love
then there were the women who were drawn to him,
suffering insults and beatings, finally rejected. and yet
still clinging to him, degraded by jealousy and despised
love,.but still .,remaining faithful. That day, for the
fll'st time for a very long time, I wept. I shed im·olun­
tlry tears of vexation about these peoplot about my
&amp;iend Muoth, and life and love, and also secret tears
79

about myself who lived amongst everything  as if on
    </p>
    <p>
     another Star, who did not understand life, who longed
for love and yet was afraid of it.
I did 1',ot go to see Heinrich any more for a long time.
At that time he was enjoying triumphs a, a singer of
Wagner opt"ra and WJS beginning to be r'lfJrdc.-d as a
celebrity." At the same time. I also had a mod&lt;Tate
amount of publidty . .M song'I had bel"n published and
well rt.'&lt;.ei\·ed and two piecei, of my chamber-music had
been performc.·d. It was still jm,t ll little encouragi,ng
recognition amongM friend'!; th&lt;' critic.s ,till said little
or were for the moist p.n t indulgent tow:mli. a1e :t'I a
beginner.

I spent a great deal of tinu· wi1i1 reist'f, the violinii,t.
He liked me, prahcd m,· work, and took friendly pleasure
in it. He propheo,ied great thinR'I for me and was alwav'i
read\· to pla nm .. il with ml". Jmt thl' ,amc I felt th,tt
something was l.u king. I was drawn to 1uoth, althouh
Ii.till a\'oidcd him. I did not hear any more from Lottit·.
\\'hy then wa'I I not content:' I rl"proachl"d m\i.df for
    </p>
    <p>
     nut being satisfied \\hh the l·ompan of Tcii,cr, who wa'i
so good and loval. But I found !lnmething lacking in
him, too. lie wai. too happ, too&lt; hccrful, too tontentt'&lt;I;
4c seemed to have no depth. He did not 'lpeak wl'II of
Muoth. Sometimci. when !\fuoth ,:m at the th&lt;atrc, he
looked at me and whisprred: .. I k ha, ruinc.'&lt;I it ag-Jin !
That Jll&lt;Ul is quite spoilt. He doe:\n't sing Mo,arr and he
knows why." I had to agree with him and vet I did !to
unwillingly. I wai, drawn to l\fu'tb, but did not Likt to
defend him. Muoth had something that Tciser dia not
have or uR.:leri.tand and which bound me to him. 1is
nature was ,ontinually de111irinf, longing and insatiable.
So

These same qualities drove me to study and work, to
people who seemed to slip away from me, just as they
goaded and tormented Muoth in other ways. I would
always write music. I 'knew that. But J alsoanted to
create sothing out of happim·ss and abundance and
uninterrupted joy, in,tead of continual longing and a
    </p>
    <p>
     sense of Jack. Oh, why wa,; I nor happy with what I
had-my music? And why was Muoth not happy with
what he po.,scsscd -his tremendous vitality and his
11iomcn?

Teiser wa'I luc·ky; he wa-1 not tormented by any desires
for the unattainahle. He deri\'ed a k&lt;.-en, unfailing
plcai.ure from his arr He did nor ai.k for more rhan it
gave him, al'td ouu,ilt his art he war, e\'en more easy to
satisfv; ht ouly needtd a few friendly peplc, an occa,;ion­
1 !-"lMI la,, of wine. and on frl'c das an exn1rsion inro
the COlll'Lf", for he liked walkin and open-air life-. If
then· wa,; anything in the teaching!i of the theosophi,ts,
then thii. man wa!i almmt pl-rfrct·: lri,; dispo,;ition was so
kind :-.I ue harhourcd so littlt' pa11s1on and discontent.
\'et, even if I perhap'&gt; deceived 111,df. I did not wish to
be like him. I did not want to he likt· am·onP else. I
anted to remain in my own ,;kin. although it was often
so constrktivc. I hegan to fed power within me as m'
work grew and I also began to fed proud. I had to find
    </p>
    <p>
     a bridc· to reach people, I must learn how to li\'e.with
them without alwa,·11 ft-c·ling at a dii.adumar.r, If there
was no othl'r way, pcrh,tp, m, mui.ic would create a
bri,&amp;gc-. If pl·oplc did not like m&lt;'. the, would ha,·e tu
likt: my music

I could not rid Dl\''iCJf of Mll'h foolish thoughts and
vet I was rt.·adv to devote and sacrifice myself to someone
81
who wanted me, to someone who really undentood me.
Was not music the seaet law of the world? Did not
the earth and stan move in a harmonious circle? And
ihould I flave to remain alone and not find people whose
natures harmonised well with my own?
A year had gone by since I had been in this town.
Apart from Muoth, Teisler and our conductor, Rossler,
I had very few acquaintan&lt;.es at the beginning: latterly,
however, I moved about in a larger circle, which did not
particularly please or displease 1ne. Sin;c the pcrformanc;e
of my chamber-musk, I had become" .1.cqnainted with
    </p>
    <p>
     musicians in the town outside the theatre and now
enjoyed a growing reput.1tion in a i;mall cirde. I notiC&lt;.-d
that people knew and ob'ICn·ed me. Of all fam&lt;', the
sweetest is that which is not yet for any great succeH,
which cannot cause &lt;'11\"\ and which doe,; not io,olatl' you.
You go about with the feeling that OU!., arc notic.ed,
flamed and praised; you nu.-et peopl&lt;' who welcome you
with a smile, and acquaintanles who give ,ou a fri&lt;"nc.lly
nod. Younger people greet OU with re\pet·t, and "OU
secretly feel that the be,t is still to wmc, a,; all young
people do, until they see that the bei.t already lies behind
them. My pla,;urc wa,; i.poilt chiefh· by th&lt;' feeling that
the was alwaS some smpath behind this rt.'&lt;·ognition.
Quite often I even felt that people were so kind and
friendly toward,; me because I was a poor fellow and a
cripple Vhpm they wanted to con'IOle.

After a concert at which a violin duet of mine had
been played, I made the acquaintante of a rich mert.bant
called Imthor, who wa'i reputed to be a lover of msic
    </p>
    <p>
     and a patro of Oung talent. He was a rather small
quiet man with greying hair in whom one could detect
81
neither his ric.hes nor his love of art. But from what he
said to me, I could see that he understood a great deal
about music; he did not give extravagant praise, but
quiet comaetent judgement, which was wo1th ore. He
told me whit I had already known for a long time from
other sources, namely, that many mu'.iical eveningi. were
hld at his house, and new a-; wdl as c las.'.iical music was
performed. He invited me to &lt;ome down, and before
parting said: "We.have your songoi at home and we like
them. My9'laught'I' will ali.o be glad if .you will come."
Even before I thought of visiting him, I received a
written invitation from him. Mr. Imthor a'.ikc.-d permission
for my Trio in E Hal major to he performed at hi'i house.
A violinist arftl a cenT,t. compt'tcnt amatcuri., were a,ail­
able, and the first violin part would he kept for me if I
.. t"I tn play it. I knew tha1 lmthor alw.111 paid a \Cry
good fee to profei.sional muo;ician-. who pla,ed at his
    </p>
    <p>
     hodse. I would not wio;h to accc·pt thi,; .md Cl did nor
know how to take tht&gt; im·itation. Finalh-, l accepted it.
The l\, '&gt;ther mu,idans c.ame to ,ee me, rcc.eived their
parts and we had a number of rehc..1rsal,. In the mean­
time. I called round to o;cc lmthor, hut found no one at
home. Then the appointed e,t&gt;nin arri,·ed.
lmthor wa'i a widower lie li\ed in .111 old, stately,
middlc-dai.s home, one of the tcw ,till !lurrmmded bv its
old garden which had remained intact in the midst of
the growing town. I aw little of 1he g.ml'll when I
arrived in the evening, onh .i ,hort drhc with tall plane­
tr«!e in the lamp-light one could ,ee the light marL.-. on
ei trunks. In hetwec.·n them were two old statues
which had bccom&lt;' darl..tm·d with age. Bdlind the tall
lrt'es, the old, hroad. !ow home.· ,tood unassumingh.

83
From the . front-door, along the passages, stairs_, and in
all the rms we passed through, the walls were closely
covered with old pictures of family groups, f:ided land­
    </p>
    <p>
     scapes, o'Ri-fa!hioned scenes and animals. 1 arrived at
the same time as other guests. We were rd:-eived by a
boµse-kceper and taken inside.
There were not very many guests, but they seemed to
fi.h the smallish rooms until the doors of the music-room
were opened. This was a large room and everything here
looked new, the grand-pi.mo, the im,;ic-caltinc:ts, tJ1e
lamps and the chairs; only the pkturcs on the wall._
were old here, too.

The Olher two musirian'I were a!re:idy therr. Wr put
up the music-stands,-tooked into thl' lightiftg, and bt.-gan
to tune up. Then a door was opened from the far end
of the room, and J I.uh in a liJ!.hl dn·s'I &lt; ame acros11 the
half-illumined room. The other two gentl&lt;'men greeted
"her respectfulh·. She wa11 Imthor's dauJ1,hter. She looked
at me questioningly, then bl"fon· we were introduced, she
held out her hand to me and ._aid: "I know Y°'!I alrea&lt;h.
You are Mr. Kuhn, aren't you? You are ,·erv welcome."
The pretty girl had made an impre'lsion on me a, soon
    </p>
    <p>
     as she had come in. Now her voice M&gt;mukd M&gt; bright
and kind that 1 prc\secl the outstretched hand w.mnh
ana looked with pleasure at the: girl who had gn·rtecl
me in such a charming, fri,·ncllv mamwr.

''I'm lq&gt;king forward to the Trio," i,he 11aid \miling .
.. I am, too," I said, not knowing what I wa'I sa\ing.
I looked at her again and \he nodded. Then she nw&gt;vN.I
away, went out of the room and my eyes followed he'°
She soon retA1rned on her father's arm, and behind them
came the gue!its. We three musirians were in our places
84

ready to begin. Everyone sat down. A nuniber of
aC'quaintance&amp; nodded to me, the h&lt;Ht '&gt;hook hands with
me, and en evenone had \eltled down, the electric
lights we '&gt;Witched off, and only the la candle\
remained t light our mu'&gt;ic.

I had almo'&gt;l forgotten about m\ mu,;ic.. I looked for
    </p>
    <p>
     Miss Gertrude al the back of the room. \he '&gt;ell leaning
agaimt a book-c.ao,c in the dim light. Her dark brown
hair looked almoo,t black. I could not sre her e e\. Then
I ..i,oftly beclt time, nmldoo, and wt. c.ommenc.ed the
And,mte ith .t bo,1d o,\\cep of the how
Now that I WJ.'I pluin. I kit happ, J11&lt;I ,ll pec1.ce. I
swayed genth 10 the rlnthm c1.nd felt completeh ,lt ea
with the mu!i,, \\lucl1 c1.ll &lt;,et"mcd quite nc\\ to ntt: cl'I if
it hc1d just been comp&lt;&gt;'&gt;cd '.\h thought, about the mu.,ic
an' Gertrude lmthor flmn·d toµ,ethe1 &lt; lc-c1.rh without a
bHJl. I lnw mv bo\\ c1.nd ,l\l' di1eliom with m,
gl.1pce. The mu,i, puxeeded 'lllloothh and ,1t·J11ih: rt
c .irried me with it ,11011 .1 oldtn path 10 Geru udr.
whom I &lt;'11ld no lomt&lt; t ,,·c .md no" 110 loni;er «-,en
dt·,ired .u sec· I dt.·dic.c1.tcd nn mu,ic .md m, life's hrc-ath,
nn thought, J.nd m, hcJ.1 t hl her, '"' dll t:J.rh mornin
wanderer .,urrendc1., him,clf to the hluc ,l, c1nd rhc
bright dew on the ml,ulmn, imolun1.111h .md \\ithout
,.urihcing him11elf. SimultJ11&lt;ou, \\ilh 1hi, fceli11 of
wdl-bcin J.nd the inue.1,in ,uhm1,· of '&gt;Ollllll. I \\.l'I
    </p>
    <p>
     OH'I\\hclmcd In ,m a,toni,hin kt:lin nf h.ipL&gt;mC!i'li. for
I .,ud,knh lnew \\ h,11 Im,. w.i.,. It ".1, not .1 ne" ft't·lin.
but r# da11hl,1tion .uul t&lt;mhrmation of old ,u,pidon,, .i
1'._t"ll ... n lo ,l 11,lll\C Ulllllll\.
The flr-.t 1110,cmcnt w,h hni.,hcd: thctt· ''il!t ju..t a kw
monwn1,' pc1.u,e

Then there were the slightly discordant squnda oC
insttuments being tuned up. Beyond intent and approving
faces, I saw the dark head for a moment, the l'ICll-shaped
forehead , .. nd. the hrm, red lips. Then I ta9.&gt;e&lt;1 lightly
on my stand and we c.ommenced the 11CC011d movement,
which spoke for it1elf. The pl.iyrn warmed up, the
iqcreasing C.tming in the meloch &amp;welled into a
c.rcscendo; it took. 1c..tlr\&amp; upward flight\ and then faded
away with sad longing. 'I he c.cllo tool. up tht melody
clearly and enthmia1tital1, de,elopd it -.uongh aad
insistenth, and introdmcd it ,ofth into the n&lt;'w lower
key, whete it faded .tW.l\ dc,p.,iringh on h.tlangry
sounding ha,, note...
    </p>
    <p>
     This second 111oement "" Ill\ umf&lt;-.,.,ion.m ,ulmi1,ion
of ffl longing and I.1tl. of m, he.art\ dt·,iic. l"he third
movement \\.ts intended to rcp1e-,cnt ,.1tiir,t.u tion .tnd
fulfilment. But that cu·ning I L.new th.u II WJ'&gt; not
correct, and I pla,ed it \\ith imhflerence .,, ,omething
that wa-. finiir,hed with. I-or I thought I no\\ I.new
e,c.atth how the fulfilmc:nt ir,hould hJH' ,ou11dcd, how the
radiance and pc.ice ,hould haH' emerged through the
raging ,;tonn of 1mmd. H'\l'.tling the light from behind
the bean clood-. \II thi-, \\d'I not includ,·d in Ill third
movement; it w.i, onh gentle relief from gt owing di,;­
sonance ancl .in attempt to reh C .ind ,trengthen the
main theme a little. 1 here wa., no harmom or r.adianc.e
in it suc.f\ a1 wao, now revealed and expcrien&lt;cd within
me, and I war, ,urprised that no-one seemed to notice it.
My Trio wa1 fmi-.hed. I bowed to-the other two pt,,er1
,md put mv violin away. The lihr-. were -.witched on
again and t l{ucr,t,; st.trtecl to stir. M.tn, of them &lt;c1m:
up to me 1\-ith the mual polite rem.irk!t, prai,;e and
    </p>
    <p>
     86

aitidllDI to demonstrate that they were expert judges.
No-one mentioned the chie fault in the work. .
The gt.pta spread out into different rooms. Tea,
cakes and "ine were 'lCrved, and the men tmed. One
hour passed and then another. At last, what I hardl·
dared to hope for any longer took place. Gertrude stood
before me and held out her hand.
"Did 'OU like it? I a11ked.
"Yes, it wa'i beautiful." she said. But I \aW that 'ihe
nwant more than tJiat, llO I said: "\ ou mean the 'iCcond
movement. The la.,t one i'I not good."

She looked al me again c u1iomh, with the .,agadn of
a mature woman and ,;aid: "You I.now it ,·our,;elf. The
first movcmeftt is good mu-.ic; thl' 'lt·,ond movemt·nt i
greatly develop&lt;.-d and demand'i too much from the third.
P;,.. oulJ also !,Cl! while you were plaving when ,our
heart w.:1., in it and wht&gt;n it was 001."
    </p>
    <p>
     11 pleased me to hc,tr that her Jm·cl·. bright ees hacl'
obi,ervt'd me without m J..nowini:;- ir. I already thought
on thar 111 t c,·cning o our mcctiug how glorious it
would uc to spend one's whole life regarded by those
beautiful, candid ecs, and how it would tht'n be impos­
sile ever to thinl or do ill. And from that l'\ening I
knew that m dt'sirc for unity and sweet hannony could
be sati.,ficd, and that tht're w.l !,Ollleont&gt; on ecll'th whose
glance and voi&lt; c made an instant re11ponse to e,·ery t!trob
of my pulse and C\'en breath in m, bod,.
She alM&gt; felt an immccliatc 'IHnpathC'lic response
tow¥ds me and right from the beginning she was able
\p bi frank ancl natural '1th me, without fear of mis­
understanding or a brt:.a.ch of confidence. She4rnmediately
made friendl!i with me with the speed and ease that is
87

only possible with people who are young and almost
unspoilt. Up till that time I had occasionally been
attracted to girls, but always-and particular since my
    </p>
    <p>
     ·accident..J1with a h. wistful and unsure fec_:\ing. Now,
inste-t1d of being just attracted, I was really in love, and
it -seemed that a thin, grc vc:il had faUen from my eyes
and that the world la,· before me in its original dhine
light as it does to childrc..n, and as it appears to u" in
our dreams of Parc1dh,e.

At that time, Gt.'l"trude was hardl\ more that twc·my
vears' old, as lcndr .1.nd health, a-. ,t -.uon ,t:rng trc·e.
She had pao,secl untouched through the· mu,11 turbulenc c
of adolescenn·. following the clict,,tc·, of ht"r own noble
nature like ..1 clcarl 1ku·lopi11 mdcKh. l'·klt h.1pJl\ to
know .i pt·r,on lil..c h&lt;.·t in thi, imperkc t world and I
could not think of tring to, ,tptmc· ht·1 .md 1..t·t·p lll-r for
_myself. I wa .. gl.ul to be pc·rmitrt·d to ,h.ue her h,,ppy
Outh a little and to !..now riht from the· heinning that
I would be indudd ;uuong.,t hc·r do..c fr il'nd,.
During the night aftc·r that um,i, ,tl &lt;.'\cuing. I did not
fall asleep for a long time. I wa, not tormented In am·
fever or feeling of rc,tlci,&lt;,ne.,.., hut I I.I\ .1w.1J..c· ,tnd c1.ic.l
    </p>
    <p>
     not wish to lt'ep beuu,c I knew th.1t m, i.pliug-timc
h&lt;\d arrived and that 3:ft&lt;"r long, wi,tfnl, futile w,mderings
and wintrv scaom, nl\ hcJrt wa, now ,It re,;t. M, room
was failed with the pale glimmc·r of night. I wuld ,;cc
-all the g"al" of lif  and art lying heforc me lilc wind-
1wcpt peak\. J wa&lt;t awc1re of what I had so often lrn.t,
the harmom· and inward rhvthm df mv lift tr,1&lt; etl , ight
back to the lcgcmlan ,c.ar, of mv d1ildh&lt;K&gt;&lt;I. And "·hep
I wanted ,,xpre.,-, thi du·,1mlile he.1.ut and i.ublimi1,
of feeling briefly and call it tn, ,t name, then I had to
88

give the name of Gc.-rtrude. That is how I fell asleep
wben it was already approaching morning, and the next
day l awa\enec.J refrc,;hed after a long, deep sleep.
I then ryectcd on my recent £celing'I ol d,-,pair and
also pridt.", and I realised what had been Ja/king. Today
nothing tormented me or annop·d me. I again heanJ
the divine mu,;ic and had Ill Ollthful dream of the
harmony of the sphere'!. I again waU,t:d ,md thought and
    </p>
    <p>
     breathed to an inward melod; life again had meaning
and I looked forward to a heuer fu1111c. ="o-nnt&gt; noticed
llw ,hang&lt;· m rm·; there w.1, no nn&lt;· &lt; lo: enough. Onlv
Teii,er, with hi'I lhildlik&lt;- '&gt;impli&lt;il\. ga,e me a fricndh­
tap on tht&gt; iihouldcr durin n·he,lT'&gt;al .ll the theatre and
said: "You ltpr wdl l.t'&gt;t niht, didn't Ou:-" I rhouht
of wmething to plca!,C him and during the next intcnal
I .,,;,i: "Tci11cr. where au· ,ou oin to thi., 'iiununer?"'
'1 hcreupc11 he laugllt'cl ha .. hfulh ancl flmhed a, red ,l'I an
ensaged girl who i, ,l,l..&lt;·d ,llmnt her w&lt;·dding da, anlf
he said: "Dear me, th,11\ a Inn W,l\ otl H'I. hut look, I
have tl t, ·ket, ,tlrea&lt;h. · II&lt;· tool thl·m out of hi'I
waistco,at pod.et. "Thi., time I ,t.irt from l\odemee: then
the Rhim· ,alle,. 1-'ilNt·ntum. Lichtemtein. Chur, Albula,
tppcr F.ngadinc, !\lalaja. Bt·rell :md Lale Come&gt;. I
don't know ,lhout thl' n·turn journc, Ht."
He:-picked up hi, , iolin ag.1in and looked at me:-with
pride and d&lt;'light ,hini11g 0111 of hi., hlm·-gre, chillike
eye,;, whid1 'il"Cmed lll'H'r to h:n l' ,t·t·n .m, of th filth and
sorrow in the \\orld. I felt ,l 'l'll'&gt;l' ol lin..hip with him
    </p>
    <p>
     and .r.ht W,I\ ht lo,,J..,d fon,.ud to hi, long W,llkiug
1»&gt;litl:l\, to freedom :m,l un·frec unit, \\ ith ,un. air and
tarth. In the iiamc ""' I felt rl'lll'Wt'd pk"6ure at the
thought of all th" path,; in m, lifl· "hkh la, before me
R9

as if illumined by a briJliant new sun, and .which I
thought I· could travel along steadily with bright eyes
and a pure heart.
Now, 1'..hen I look back, it all seems very {emote, but
I am still conscious of some of the former light, even if
it is not so dazzling. Even now, as in the past, it is a
cemfort to me in times of depression, and disperses the
dust from my soul when I pronounn:· the name of
Gertrude and think of how she came up to me in the
music-room of her father's house. as lichtly as a bird and
as naturally as to a friend.
I now visited Muoth again, whom I had avoided as
-much as possible since Louie's pinful confc11sion. He
had noticed it and was, I knew. too proud' and also too
    </p>
    <p>
     indifferent to do anything about it, i.o we had not he-en
alone together for monthi.. Now that I had r&lt;'ne\\t-d
faith in life and was full of good intentions, it seemed
very important to me to approach rn, ueglec1ed fritnd
again. A new M&gt;ng that I had composed gue me an
excu'\C for doing so. I decided to dedkate it to him.
It was similar to tht" Avalanche Song. whih he liked,
and the words were a" follows:

The hour was late, I bl,·w out nl\ candlt·:
B the open window I t,,rrt."f'ted the niht.
It embraced me gently, call&lt;'d me brothtr
Aqd promi'ICd me friendship in m -,ad plight.
\Ve were sick with the samt earning,
Our dreams were gloomy and long,
We hispered about the davs of old
W'hen we were young and hope wa" strong.
go

I made a copy of it and wrote above it: "Dedicated
    </p>
    <p>
     to my &amp;iend Heinrich Muoth."
Then I \went to sec: him at a time when I knew he
would be \t home. I heard him i,inging ai,  walked
up and down reheaning in hi,; i,tatcl room;, He received
me coolly.

"Good heavens, it',; Mr. Kuhn! I thought you would
not come any more."
"Well," I !laid, "here I am. How are Ou?"
:The same ai, ever. Good of ,ou 10 come and see me
again."
"\'cs, I haven't been u·n Im.al rr·u·ntl . . "
"It has been ven c,idc·nt and I know wh,."
"I don't thtnk i.o."'

"Yes, I do. I.ottil· once went to 'it'C ,ou. didn't i,he?"
"''. hut I don't want to tJlk about it."
"It isu'r lt .1II nl0&lt;l'.,.,,1n. An,"a,, hc1c OU .i.re again."
"J have brought -.omething with ml'."
I gave hi111 the mmic."
    </p>
    <p>
     "Oh, r1'W song' Th.tt i,; good. I \\J&lt;, afraid ,nu
might llcvotc vour.,df ,;olel to drcan string music.
The1e'o; a dedication on it .alread. \\'hat. to 1m·' llo
O,u ml'an it?"

I wa,; ,;urp11.,cd thal i1 o;ecmcd to ghc him 'IO much
pll":nure. I had -.omehow ex pee tcd J joke about the
dcclk,ttion.
"Of c-our I am pk.1-.l-cl," he -.aid .. incereli. "i am
alwa," glad whl'll worth while people thinl of me. and
parti6ularly \Ou. I h.td nalh i.truck OU off the lii,t."
"Have ,ou a li111t :"
"Oh Co;, when one h.io; or h,1,; h,ul .io; 1'111°' friends
ai, I .. I could make 9uitc a cat.1.logue. I ha\oc alwa,s
91

thought most of the highly moral ones and thme are
just the ones wbo diw:,ird me. One can find friends
amongst r,lscals any d.ty, but it is dilficulf to do so
amongst ,,idealists and ordinary people if /,one ha a
    </p>
    <p>
     reputation. You arc the only one at the-moment. Aud
the wa thin .trl" going--- J&gt;t.·oplc like bt."'lt what
is hard for them to ob1.1in! Don't ,on agree? I h.ne
alwaS wanted friendi. but it ha., alw,,,., been omen who
have been attr.atted to me."
"That ii. palll ,our own t.ault, MA-Muoth."
"Wh, ?"
"You liL.e to treat all people .... ,on llo \\omeu. Jt doe-s
not worL. with fric.ndi. .md th,tt i .. ,, h, the, leave vou.
You are .an egoi'&gt;t."
"Thank goodm·,., I am. What i, mmc, OU arc too.
\\'hen that dreadful Lottie.· poured out her t.1le of woe
to OU, ,ou didn't help hc.·1 in .am \\,1,. You al"'&gt; didn't
'"make the incident an c.·,cu&lt;,C frn convu 1i11g me, for whi&lt; h
I am grateful. Thf' .1lf.tir g,l\c OU .a feeling of a,e1 .. ion
and OU L.ept a\\a\ from me"
"Well, here I am ag,un. \on arc right, I ,hould have
tried to help Lottie, but I don't mulu,tand these thinw,.
She her!lelf lauglu·d J.l me ,md told me I didn't undet­
sttnd amthing about love."
    </p>
    <p>
     "Well, OU keep to friend .. hip. It i, .11 .. n ,1 good i,phcrc.·.
Now we'll -studv the i,ong; 11it dmu1 aud pla, the .ic&lt;.0111-
panimenJ.- Do ,ou 1cmember how it wa., with ,our h1.,r
one? It look, .. ., if ,ou are gradualh becoming famou\."
"Thing.. are improving but I witl nc,cr cat&lt;h UJl with
Oll,"
"Noni,er-. ! You are a tompo..cr, d ueator, a littlt
god! What is fame to you? People like me have 10 pres."
9.1
on to get anywhere. Singers and tight-rope walkers have
lO do the same a'I women, take their good'I to the market
while they\a,re till in good condition. Fame up to the
hilt, and m'ney, wine and c.hampagnc:! J&gt;hotctp"aph in
rhe newspaper,, and bouquet.,! I tell you, 0if I hccame
unpopular today, or perhap'I had a little inffammarion
of the lung,;, I would b&lt;· fmi,;h&lt;'d tomorrow. and fame
ancl bouc1ucu, and all the rest would come 10 an abrupt
end."
"9h, don't worry about that until it happl'm,."
"Do you know. tm vc·n c uriom ahout i,rtowing old.
    </p>
    <p>
     Youth is a real 'twimlll· -a 'twindl&lt;." of th&lt;· P1&lt;·., and text­
bool..s ! The mo.,t wonderful time· of one\ life! Yet old
people al"a"'.,t·cm much moH· ,cmtenred IO me. Youth
is the mo.'tl difhc·uh rime of life. For example, suicide
rar h cxc ur., among.,, old pcopl&lt;-."
I btgau o plav the: pi.mu and he· turned hi., attention
10 tl1e song. He qui, kl learned the mclcxh and ,ta\e mt!'
an appr&lt;'ciativc nudge with hi, clho, .n a plaC"t· where
it returr d ignific.anth from a minor to a major ke,
When 1. arrived home in the e,cninf{. I fc,und, as I had
kared, an cmclopc from !\fr. Inuhor contdining a short,
friendly note and .i. more than !luh,;tantial fee. I ,;ent the
m,jney hack and t'nclo .. cd a note ,;a\"in,t I wa'l quite
'mfortabh off and pn·f&lt;'rrcd to be allowed to ,isit his
house as a friend. \\7ht·n I o;aw him again. hl' im itC'd me
to comt ancl visit him again ,;oon and .. aid: "I tholght
vou would feC'l likc that about it. ,t·rrrude said 1 hould
not ,;ind ,ou an,·thing. but I thouht I would. just the
sanu.."
'.From that tim&lt;' I wa ... a ,·en frequent ue,t Imthor's
    </p>
    <p>
     house. I p1aed the first violin part at mam concerts
9j
there. I brought new music with me, my own -nd other
people's, -and most of my shorter work.a were tint per­
formed there.
· One aJternoon in spring I found Gertnµe at home
alone. It was raining and as I had slipped on the front
step on leaving, she would not let me go immediately.
We discussed music, and then it happened almost unin­
tentionally that I began to talk to her confidentially, in
particular about the grim period I had gone through,
during which I had composed my fir,t songs. Then I   felt embarrassed and did not L.now whether I had been
wi'H: in making thi'S confc'S,ion to the girl. Gertrude
said to me almost timorous!: "I have something to
confess which I hope 'OU will not tJL.enmis'i. I have
made copies of two of &lt;&gt;Ur song,; :md leJrned th"m."
"Do you sing?" I t&gt;xdaimed with surprist·. At. the
same time I remembered with ammt·ment the im id&lt;nt
of m first OUthful lo,e, and how I heJr&lt;l ht:r sinp, so
badly.
    </p>
    <p>
     Gertrude smiled .ind nodded: "Oh H'"· I .. in. although
only for one or t\\O friend,; and for m, own plc:,.,urc.
I will sing ,our .. Ollb" if ,ou \\ill auompam mt· nn the.
piano."
_\\'c w,·nt to the pidno and .. he h,md&lt;'d me tlu· mmi,
which she had &lt;.opicd in her neat, feminine haml. I
began the ac&lt; omp.inimcnt softh· o,o that I could li,ten
to ht&gt;r .eropcrly. !-the 'i,mg on&lt;· 'Song, then another, ,md J
listened and h&lt;'ard Ill mu'ti&lt; changed and 1ra11 .. formed.
She sang in a high, pure ,oi&lt;c, and it wa .. the S'feetest
thing I had ever bc.ird 111 ID life. Hl"r voice went
through tar like the o;outh wind acro'i a snow covei\"tl
vallcv, and ever' nott&gt; made my heart £eel lighter.
94
Although I felt happy and almost ai; if floating on air,
I had to control mi,clf, for there were tears ht m tCS
which neally obliterated the mu11ic.
I thougl\ I had known what love wa\, an had felt
wise in my knowledge. I had looked at the world with
new eye, and felt a c.lo'&gt;cr l.inr,hip toward\ aJI people.
    </p>
    <p>
     Now it was different; now then:: wa\ no longer light,
solace and plc.u,urc, hut i,torm ,md flame. 1\h heart now
exulted, beat more quid..l and did not want to J..now
annhing more ;,.bout life; It jtM Wdnf'd to con,ume
itself in it'I 011 ftime. If amom· had now ar,J..ed me
what love wai,, I r,hould h.t,e hc-'n .tble to dei,cribe it,
and it would have i;ounded ardent Jnd tumultoui;.
In the meaatimc. I could lu.,,r GC'rtrude\ ,oice ni;ing.
It seemed to ,.111 me and wi'&gt;h to nhc me pleasure, and
Vf'' i, 11;oared to remote hdglw,, in,,ue,..,it,Je and ahnmt
ahen tom I now und&lt;'l'&gt;to&lt;&gt;d ho" thing-, \\ere with me.
She. could .. ing, he fricndh, Jnd nu·an well with me
but all thi'&gt; wai, not wh.11 I wanted. Jf ,he uruld not tJe
mine air ,c-., omplcteh and fore,cr, then I lhed m ,·am,
and evuthing that w,n good ancl fmt· Jnd genuine in
me had no me.aniug.
I then felt her hand on m, "houlder. I w.1-, startled,
turned round .md looked at her. Her bright e,c,; Jool..ccl
seriom, and onh after a .. ho1 t time. a,; I continutd to
ga1e at her, did i,he 'lmile 'IWt'eth and bJmh
    </p>
    <p>
     I could onll ,;a, thanl.. ,ou She did not J..now \\hat
was the matter with me. She onh 1c-ah'&lt;'&lt;I tht I was
deep¥ affected and tactfulh pie 1..ed up the threads of
our previous pleasant, eas-ffowing rnmersation. I left
slft&gt;rtl afterwards.
I went home and did not know \\hether it was stiJJ
95
raining. I Wcllkcd through the streets leaning on my
stick, and yet I did not 1eally walk and the streets
seemed unreal. I travelled on stormy dou+s .t&lt; 1 O'lS a
thangindarkened sky. I talked to tht' stofm and WdS
myself the storm, and above me in the remote di.,tan&lt;e,
I hod an illusion o hearin &lt;,omcthing. It w.is .i woma11'11
high, sweet voice and it .,cem&lt;"d quite immune from
human thoughb and emotion .... md tet ,lt the ... unc time
it seemed to have all the "ild s"e&lt;'tne.,., of p.i.,-,ion in it'I
C'l'ICnCC.
That evening I !oat in m, room ..\ithuut ,l hht A.,
I could not endure 1t .irn lonu it ",1., ,1lr&lt;',uh Luc-I
went to Muoth\ home I found h1., \\11tdow., in d,1rL.neu
    </p>
    <p>
     and turned bacL.. I \\,tiled Jhu111 for .1 loog time in th"
night, and hnalh found mHclf, \\Urih conun b,1&lt; l to
earth. out\idc the lmthor .. · g,uden rht old net·., 1 uo,tltd
i,olemnh .tround tht con&lt;eJltd hon.,t from \\hid1 no
·.ound or light pt netr.itcd, .ind p,1le \t.th cmergt'fl here
d:'ld there among the doud.,
I \\.tiled ..e,eral d.1H hcforc I H 111m«I 10 go and "t't'
Gertrude a.iin I&gt;urm 1h1., 11111t' I rt.'C"t 1ved J l&lt;·11tr
from tht· poet \\ho-,t. poem-, I h,ul o,t t lo 111m1t \\'c h,ul
commumc.t.lt·d \\1th t,1cl1 otlu r lot t\\o \&lt;"Jr\ ,tnd 1
OCf.t\lOn,llh fl'l.&lt;'I\ cd llll&lt;"rt """ lcll&lt; i.. fwm 1nm I .,cnt
him nn mu,.u and he "l'III me 111., po, m., I It 110\\ ll&lt;IOt&lt;.·
D'ar 1r,
I h.ne not \\llltt·n to ,on fm .. onw tune I ha,c
b'ct·n H'f\ bm I.-,er \lllC I h.ne bcunnl' fJmiha1
with ,our mmi,, I hdvt· h,rd .1 tc1i.t m m111d fm  ,ou, but it \\ould not fmm w1t·lf No\\ I h.ne
it iiJ1d It  ., ahno\t reach h 1-, .1 hhrt 110 for ,111
opera, and ,ou mu.,t &lt;&lt;&gt;mpmt tht· mn.,i&lt; fm 11
q6
I galher you arc not a particularly happy person;
    </p>
    <p>
     that is revealed in your music. I will not speak
aboJt myself, but this text is just for you. As there
is nothing else to ma!..&lt;· u, rejoice, le u, present
lomething good to the publii, which for moments
will make· it dear even to those who are thkk­
,kiunc·cl. that life i!&gt; 1101 lht·d ju"lt on the "IUrface.
As we do not n·ally know where to begin ourselves,
it worrie., 11,; to be awar&lt;' of the waned poweri,
of othtr"I.
\'our,;, Ham H.
It fdl lil..t· a '&gt;park in unpowdtr. I wrote for the
libretto and was '&gt;O impatient that I tore up my letter
and '&gt;Cnt a tdtgram. The mam.1,cript arrh·ed a week
later. It wa, a [&gt;J'l'iionatc lovt' ,101 y ,Hitten in \'erse.
·r .. r wc·re still gap'&gt; in it. hut it was suffident for me
for the 1i .It' hc·i11g. I H·ad it and went about with the
, CT&amp;e!, going through 111, head. I sang them and tried'
music to them 011 thl' , iolin clay and night. Shortly
aftrrw;, '!&gt; i w1·111 tn ,ce Gt·rtrucle.
"You must help nw," I cried. "I am composing an
    </p>
    <p>
     opera. Here art· thnc..· '&gt;Oil., suitahle for your ,oke.
\\'.ill ,ou have a look at tht·m and ,;ing them for mt"
some time?"
She seemed ,·en-plt·a,cd, a,ked me to rell her ahout
it, glanu·tl at the um,it and prmni,c·,1 to karn the "lpngs
soon. Then followed a wonderful, fruitful periocl. intox­
k.ttcd with low and mmil. I wa" im ap.ahle of thinking
of an·thing cl'IC'. .md G,·nrudc wa,; the onh one who
knew m, i.e&lt; nt about the opera. I took the music lo
h:r and she lcartl&lt;'d it and sang it. I comultel'fter about
it, played ev&lt;.-ryrhing to her. and she shared my cnthus-
1&gt; 97
iasm, studied and sang, advised and helped me, and
enjoyed 'the secret and the growing work that belonged
to us both. There was no point or suggcstioh which she
did not ,immediately understand and assimilate. Later,
she began to help m with copying and re-writing music
in her neat hand. I had taken sick-leave from the theatre.
No feeling of embarr:mment arose hetwecn Gertrude
and 1-,ve were swept along by the same currf'nt and
    </p>
    <p>
     worked for the saml' end. It was for her, as it was for
me, the blossoming of maturing powen, a peri,pd of
happiness and magic in which my passions worked un­
seen. She did not distinguish hetWl'l'll me and rny work.
She found pleasurl" in us hoth and hdongl·d to us both.
For me, too. love and work, mm,i anlt Jifr. W'fl' no
long&lt;.T separahle. Sonll'timc11 I lcK&gt;kt'&lt;I at the lovely girl
with astoni,;hmcnt and admiration. and !&gt;he would n·tur11
my glance, and whcncvt'r l callll' 01 dt·partl·d. '&gt;he pressecl
'my hand more warmly and firmh 1h.1n I ,·t·mnr&lt;"d to
press hers. An"cl whenever I wall..C:"d thronAh thl' garden
and entered the old homu· clnring them· mild 11priug
days, I did not know whethtr it w:l', m, work or my Ion·
which impc;lled and exalted Inl'.
Times like tho,e do not la,;t 1011g. Thi!&gt; one wai.
approaching the end, and the flam&lt;· within Ill&lt;' steadil
flared up again into confused dtc,in·,. I !1:lt at hC"r piano
and she sang the I.u,t a&lt;·t of m opera. of which the
sopranr part was nnnpleted. Sht· 'lang ht·,mtifull. and
while Gertrude'!&gt; ,oice still soarl'd, I rl'ff'Cted upon the
    </p>
    <p>
     glorious days whid1 I eh w&lt;.T&lt;". already changin1. and
knew that incvitablv different and mort· doudtd da\S
were on ·1,e way. Then !&gt;he smiled at me and lea11l'd
to,rards me in connet·tion with the music. She notkc.-d
98
the sad expres.ion on my £ace and looked at me question­
ingly. I dil not say anything. I stood up, held her face
gently in both hands, ki11!1Cd her on the forehead and on
the mouth and then 11:it down again. She rt1itted all
this quietly and almost ,;olemnly, without 11urprise or
annoyance, and when she 11aw tears in my eyes, she
gently 11troked my hair, forehead and shoulder with her
so£ t, 110100th hand.
Then I began to play LhC' piano and ,he ,ang again,
nd.&amp;.'1.e ki11., and tJt wonderful hour rcmaint'd unmen­
tionedthough unforgotten hl·tY.cen ma-. our hnal secret.
The other ,ec.ret could not r,mJin between u, much
longer; the opera now required othet pc·ople and a,sis­
tanto,. The h1' one mmt he· Muoth, a-. I had thought
of him for the principal c.h.u acte1, who.,e impetuosity
    </p>
    <p>
     .,,it. vi.,lent emotion, could well be interpreted with
Muoth'!:. ,JicC' .md pen,oualit\. I clela,·ed doing am thing
for a 11hort time. Mv work wao, 'itill J bond betweerl
.ertrucll· and r It hc.·lungcd to m both and brought
u, bot' ult..i .. urt."" and care,. It wa .. hle a garden which
was unknown to Jll\-OD&lt;' else, m J -,hip nn \\hich we two
alone.· &lt;.rO..'IC'd a t."at ocean.
Siu· J-.1.cd mt." about it hct,elf \\ hen ,he felt and saw
th.1t 11hc could not help me furthc.r.
"Who will -.ing the ptindpc1l part?" ,i;he asked.
"Hcimith !\luoth."
She -.eemc.·d "m p11,ed.
"Oh," 11hc ,i;.1id. ".ire ,ou -,eriom? I don't like him."
"llr i,i; a friend of mine, Mi,11 Gertrude, and he would
be 'lt1it.1ble for th&lt;' part."
.. oh 1"
A stranger had already come between m.
9
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter five
    </head>
    <p>
     Mcanwhill", I had not thought about Muoth's holidays
and love of tra,·elling. I le wa, wry plea!il'd ahout my
plans for an opera and promised to help me as m1.H.h a,
possible, but hl" was &lt;&gt;C&lt;upied with travelli11g plans and
could only promise to go through his part for the a1llumn.
I copied it out for him :1, for as it was ready. He took it
with him and as usual I did not hear amthing from him
all those months.
So we obtained a rl"spite. A vt'ry pla11a11t relation'lhip
now existed between Gertrmlt· and I. I believe tb:1t - 'since that time at the piano, she knew &lt;1uite well what
was going on insidt· me, hut !lht· m·,·t·r !laid a word and
was not differc.·nt with mt· in am wa\. Siu· did not only
like my mu!lic, she likl"d nw too, and fell ai. I did, that
there was a natural S'lllpath bttwt·t·n U!I and a fccling
of mutual understanding and :1tlcnion. lfrr ht·ha,·iour
towards me was therefore L.incl and friend. hut without
passion. At times, that wa,; sutlide111 for m&lt;" :uul I spent
    </p>
    <p>
     quiet, contented days in her compam. but passion always
· soon a .. ..,se as the additional ra,·tor htw&lt;·n u,, and hl"r
friendliness then seemt-d onh-likt d1arit to me. and it
tormented me to !IC&lt;" that the wats of lo,·&lt;· and,dt'lir&lt;"
which overpowered me, were alien and disah'TCahlt to
her. Oftf 1 I decein.'CI ID'W-lf and tri·d to pero;uatle 1m·
self "iat she had a pladd, upcmotional tempt·rament.
100
Yet in my heart I felt it was not true. and I knew
Gertrude ,well enough to know that Jove would also
bring her hazards and l1 tumult of emotions. I often
thought about it later, and I felt that if I hud1laken her
by 11torm, fought for her, and drawn her to me with all
my strt·ngth, she would have· foJJow&lt;·d me and gone with
me for good. But I mi,tru.,tccl JCT plcai,;mt manner
towardi, me, and when she was gentle and showed affec­
tion for nu·, I attributed it to the mual undesired
'sut_i,:.,h,. I rnultt not ricl myi,clf of the thought that if
i,he had'lit-ed a ht·althy, attra&lt;.tivc man as much ar, she
liked me·, ,he could not have maintained the relationship
    </p>
    <p>
     011 this qni&lt;"t, frit·ndh ha11i. Jt w.1, then not rare for me . ,
to i,pcnd hour., frding that I would ha,&lt;· exchanged my
mni&lt; a11d all that wa'I of ,aim· to me for a i,traigbt leg
:11,cl a - \ di'lp&lt;&gt;,ition.
About that time Td,tr du·w &lt; lo,&lt;·r to nu· again. J-te
l'·a,· incti,pem.ahle for 111, wor J..  md ,o hc wai, the next
om tn 1, ,ff" my i.ecrc·1 ,md bt·c nm familiar with the
lihrcttc, .,cl m plam for .m opt·ra. lfr wa-, ,cry discreet
about it all and took thc work home to Mmh. \\'hen he
&lt;am&lt;· a:,in, hi!&gt; chilclliJ..c fate with it, fair ht·:1rd beamed
with plca,un· and c,dtt·ment ahout thl· mm,ic.
"That nplr,t of ,our, i, dng to he good:" he ex­
clainll'd with t·xcitcml·nt. "I can aln·,uh feel the O\'er­
turc in m, finger-tip,: ow, let\ go and ha,·c a drink,
ou ra'IC al. If it Wl'Tt' not tun pni,umptious. , would
imggcst that v.c drink .t pkdgc of brotherhood-but it
must not hl· cnforn·d."
I willinl :uc.·t·ptt·c 1 tlw imi1.11ion ·md we had a
pleai,;mt cH·niuA togt·ther. For tht first time t,iser took.
me home with him. lli sii.ttr. who had been left alone
    </p>
    <p>
     101
at her mother's death, had recently come to live with
him. Teiser could not speak highly enough tabout the
comfort of his changed household after his long bachelor
yean. HI· ,ister was a quiet, pleasant girl, with the
same bright, childlike e,e11 ao, hl·r brother. Sht was called
Brigitte. She brought us &lt;·.a.kes and cleat AlHtrian wine,
also a box of large Virginia cigars. Wt drank the f1r11t
glass of wine to her health and tht i.tcmul to nm good
friendship, and while Wl' ate call,;, drank wine and
smoked, Teiser moved &lt;klightedl\' ahcru the roo111 -;:irst
he sat down hv the piano, then on tht .,tttec ith a
guitar. then at the rnd of tht· t.ibll· with hi,; ,iolin, and
pla·ed an·thing pltw,ant that w,,., gninq, through hio,
head. He ,;ang too, and hi,; briP,ht e,e11 ,;parkled and it
was all a trihutt to ml' .and to the opera. l1 ,;eemed that
his sister had the same blood in htr ,ein,; and ,;wore no
lps by Mozart than he cliil. Aria .. from 'The Magk
Flute' and excerpt,; from 'Don ;im·.rnni', intt·rruptt-cf
now and then ll\ tom·e, .. ation .md thl' clinJ..in of
    </p>
    <p>
     gla11'1es, ec.hot.-d throup_h the littlf' home, hcautifullv
accompanied h, her brother on the· , inlin. pi.ino or
guitar. or e,cn jmt b whi .. tling ·
I was still engaged a,; a ,·iolini-.t in tht nrd1e.,tra for
the short summer .. ea,;on, hut had a .. ktd for m, rdta:ie
in the autumn as I wi,;hecl to devote all my time and
energy to m,· work. The c·onrluc101. who w:ti, annmt'll
because''I was leaving, wa., veq rml&lt;' to nu· toward" the
end, but Teiscr helped mt· greath· to ,kftond myself and
to rise above it.
With the help o thi,; lo·al fri&lt;ml, I worked at tl;'e
instrumerication of my op&lt;'ra, and while re,;pccting ml'
. ideas, he rigorously put hi'I finr;cr on an-y crror'5 in the
IOI
treatment of the orchestration. Often he became quite
annoyed Md rebuked me like an out,;poken conductor
until the doub1ful pa:r::t '4hic.h I had liked and wished to
retain was &lt;rmsed out and altered. He wa-, al.fays ready
with cxampl&lt;'s whcne\ er J wa,; in doubt. \Vhcn I presented
r-omcthing ,m,ati!,fa&lt; toril or war, not vcnture&lt;,ome
    </p>
    <p>
     enough, he &lt; illlll' running to me with \C.on·-. and c,howed
me how Mo,art or I.oruing would have handled it, and
inferred that my hc·,i1,1tiu11 v..i-. cowardic.e, or m, ob,;tin-
'acr, ... dadou, i.t,.pi,li· \\'c hcllowcd at cac.h other,
disput,·chmd J,'TCW c·xcitcd, and if it o«uncd in Teir.cr',;
hou,c:, 8rigit1t li,tcncd tom attentively. rnmt· to and fro
with wine and cig.1r,. aml ,nmothc·d out m.,m crumpled
i.h&lt;er, of mmif &lt;,trrfulh and .,,mpathctic :1lh. Her admir­
ation for m&lt;· w.1, c·,1ual to hc·r afft·c tion for her brother;
tc, h'-·r I w.i., a mac,tro. 1-.H·n und.1, I \\.1, imited to
lumh at th&lt;' Td .. tr\ .. \f1,·1 lw UH:',tl, C'H·n if there wis
onh a tim him· pard1 in tht· .. i..,. Wl' \\l.lll for a ridt· out
by tra111 \\'e then \\.1IJ..c·d nH·r the: hill, and through Lh&lt;'
wood"· t,,Jlcd .md ,.111. and the rei.,er., frequently
txldled in thc·1r natiH· f.i.,hion.
\\'c one e ,topJll'd for ., liht mc.1I in tht· ardcn of a
,·illaAt' inn from \\ht·H· till' mcin mmic o a countn
d,tnll' dlift,·d aom, to 11, thwugh wide optn windows.
\\'htn Wl' had l"atc·n .md ,.11 rc,ting-m er our cider,
Briitt&lt;" -,lipped at roi,, to the homt .ind went in,ide·. \\"c
    </p>
    <p>
     wall ht·d hc.·r do thi, and lllKlll ,ttcr we i.aw h ... "t dance
pa,t tlw window, .,., f1c.·,h ,rnd .. paJl,ling .1, ,t i,ummcr
morning. \\'hc.·n .,Jc.' n·tu .. m·d. ·r &lt;"l'lcr !ihool.. his finger at
f\er .md said sh&lt; .. h01,fd haH' .1,J..cd him to go along too.
She then blmhcd ,md ht'l,unc emhauatii.cd, hool. her
head protcr,tingh and Icv1led at me.
IOj
.. What the matter?" asked her brother.
"Nothing," she said, but by chan&lt;"e I sa\t how she
made him realise the significtncc 0£ her glance, and
Tciser sai\f :, "Oh, of course!"
I did not say an thing, but it sc..-cmcd str.mgl' to Jill' to
sec· her cmharrass&lt;·d hc..'t·ame shl" had dannd whik I w.i"
tJ\erc. For the firi1t timl" it OC&lt;"Ufft'&lt;I to ml" that thl'ir
walks al'to would ha,·c been qui&lt; k&lt;·r and longer if I had
not been tbt'rc to re,.tri&lt; t them, and after that tinu-I
only joined thl'm Offa .. ionally on their ,uml.,y l''-&lt; uJ.M,,.mi..
\\'hen we had gonl' throuh the ,opr:1110 pa1." .i .. far a'&gt;
possible. Gertrude noti,ed that I w,,., nl\u 1.mt to ivc
up my frequent ,i.,it'&gt; to hl·r and 0111 pll,,,.mt time'&gt;
    </p>
    <p>
     together at the pfano. aml \l't th,ll J \\a-. too ,II\ to
mak.c cxcu"''" for their «mtinu.itinn. I w:l'&gt; 'IUrpri'it"cl
when sbe suggested that I &lt;,hould \ i,it her n·ular h to
accompanv her ,ining, and I now w,nt to ht·r hntN'
two or three time .. a Wl"l.'k in tht .,ftl'fllIIJI,;, lkr fatlll'r
was pleased at h,·1 friend,hip with ml'. Gerund,· h,ul
lthl her mother ,,hl·n ,lw "'" ,till ,011111: ,ht· l\a, mi,tn,;-,
of the home and lll'r f,1thlJ kt htJ h,l\t' llt'r m,11 W,I\ in
e,eqthin ..
· The g.inlen wa,; in it, f nil ,plt·mlom. It :1hou11dl·d
with Hower,. and bird-, s.mg arouml the quit·t hmm·.
\\"hen I cnten·d the gardl'n lrom th&lt;· road and w,·nt
pai.t the old, clarkerlt'd o,tatm·, in th&lt;· drht· tow.ml., the
creeper"!oven·d hou,e, ii wa., for llll' t·.1d1 1 inw Iii,.&lt;'
entering a sanctuary, when thl· ,ni&lt;c., .uul thing., of th&lt;·
world could only pcrwtrate to a .,fight exu·nr. Th&lt;· bt&lt;"'I
hummed among the flowering hmht&lt;; in front of 1tv
window'i . ..rsuu.,hine filled 1ht· soom, producing light
reft«ions of the foliag,·. I o,at,.,ll the piano and heard
101
    </p>
    <p>
     G,rtrude .. ing. I lii,tl'm·d to her voice which ro .. e l'a-.ily
and witlu\ut effort and when, afu·r .i .. ong, we looked at
ea«,h otll'r and .. miled, i1 wa-. in a unitt·d and confiding
way a-. if httw,·cn brother and -.i-.Lcr. I often fs;,lt at thci,e
times th,tl I h,td 0111 lo .,,r,·tc.h out my h.11d., ro 1,rr.1-.p
DJ happim·-.-. ,tnd haH· i1 for good, and wt I did not do
.,o bt:c,m-.e I \\,lllt&lt;'cl to \\,tit until ,ht· .1l .. n ,howed ,ome
i,ig11 of dc .. i1&lt;· cllld l011gi11 But Gt·rttmlt· ',l'l'lllt'd to he
, 011ll'lllt·d ,tnd nut ro "j.,Ja fm .tll thin ehc. Indeed,
il r_,ften &lt;,ttmt·d ro 111&lt;· 1h.1t .,he diri not \\hh to .. hatter
thii, ptJ'.;.ful id,ttomhip ,lllcl cll',tlllh the '&gt;printime of
0111 fric·ncl,hip
If I \\-,l'&gt; di ... tppoilllf d ,thout 1111 ... 11 \\,h cl Oll'&gt;C&gt;l.tuon
to mt to luow. hem deq,h "hl c .1u·cl tor m, mu .. u. how
\\IC'II .,he umlc l'&gt;IOod .111&lt;1 \\,l'&gt; p1n11d of ir.
hi., '11,llt· of ,tlf,un I.1,trd until Jum· I hl'n Gt·rtrude
.11111 ht·r hthu ,,,·m ofl into tlH' 111011111,tim I r&lt;.mc1ined
hcJ1i11rl and \\h&lt;·m·H·r I \\cut p,to,t hL·r hou-.,·, I saw 1t
.,,,uuhu cmpr, hthind tht· pi.me. uet., . rnd the ate
w,,., lo, ' c·c' I ht· p,1111 1 t'I III m tl. gn·,\ .md f ollow&lt;'d me
    </p>
    <p>
     right ; .,o the uiht.
In tht· c,t11i11., I \\Ctlt to tht· ·1 t'l'ot'r" .,hno .. t .1lwa\'I
,, uh 11111 .. u in 111, t .1,,. ,uul .. h.u ul tht.it tl'1k1. con tented
"'" of hk. I tlr.mL. their \mui.111 \\irw and pl,nccl
Mcu.ut '4.ith tht·m \ftt·r" ,·cl., I w.1llcd h.1ck in the
mild nih,.,, "'" tnnpl&lt;., ,,.ailing .ihout m the park-.,
wc:nl hmm· \\t·,uih tu lwd hnl cw1ld not .,lt:'t·p.Ii \\35
now imonul\,1hlc· tn 1m· th.11 I «mid h,l\C hch.ned m
'!IU&lt;h .1 hrnthr1h f.t.,hitm ltm.1111., ytrtnult. and that I
h,1d ut'\l'I lnol..t·n do\\n ,ht h.nric-1. dr.1wn her to me.
tlt·n hc-r II\ .,,orm ,uul \\Oil hu I «uld i_.1gim· h&lt;'r
in htr light him· nr grc-, &lt;ill'""· mt·ri, m 'ICtiou.,, I could
u,-.,
hear her voice, and could not conceive ever havh1g heard
it without being filled with ardour and desir;-to make
love to her. Restless and agitatl-d I rose, switched on the
light and threw myself into my work. 1 made human .... voices and mstruments woo, plead and threaten. I re
peated the song of yearning in new, h.t.unting mdo&lt;lico,.
Often this comfort .t.1110 was lacking to me. Aftcrward,
I lay in bed, ardent and re&amp;tles,, in a st.ite of wretchl."&lt;I
    </p>
    <p>
     sleeplessness. I uuercd her name, Gertrude, Gertrude,
wildlv and sem,elcssl, thru11t ,olal.C and hopl' a,idc-.iJnd
surrendered mo,cl de.,pc1it ingh to thi dHadfu! ·{&gt;ino,tr .1
tion of desire. I uied out to God ,uul ,1"1..ul llim wln
He had made me thi, w.1,. win lie hc1d 111.ull· mt .i
cripple, and wh, imte.id of tht h.tppine.,,. th.it w,t., thC'
lot of the poorco,t of mm t.il.., I k h,ul hen nu· nnthin
but the terrible o,ulal.c-of lhiug in ,t whirl of ,omul.,
where, in the £.tee ol nn dc-;itc,, l &lt;n111inu.1lh dcpt&lt;ted
t.e unatt.iin.iblc- 111 .,,range f,mt,t'&gt;it,
During the d.n I wa, moll' '&gt;u«ci..,ful in &lt;otllrollmg
my emotions. I dcnched m, teeth. ,.u .11 m, \\otl.. h,un
the earl hour'&gt; of th' morning, l.Jlmt·d m,.,&lt;·lf tn 1,11..in
long wall,; and rcfrc,h'cl 111\',elf with &lt;0l&lt;l ,hoW'I h.11h ...
In the cvcningi. I fled fwm the ,h.ulo"., of the ,tppro,u h
ir!,g night,; to the l.hce1ful comp.im of the J"d.,cr,, with
,hom I obtained .1 few hour., of rl''&gt;I ,md ,;ometlme,
plea&lt;,ure. Tei,t·1 noticed that I \\,1' 11! .111&lt;1 ,utltrm ,md
put it 1wn to .ill the worl. I k .ich i'&gt;l'cl m&lt;· to 1 t:'&gt;l ,t
while, although he him'idt \\a'i full of cnthu'&gt;1,1,m  mcl
    </p>
    <p>
     inwardh was a'&gt; &lt;·'\.cited and i1np,ttit·nt ,l'&gt; I w.i, on
seeing the opera grow. 'iomttimc., I .al'&gt;&lt;&gt; &lt; .illt·d for him
and i-pent;n c,cning with him alone in the cool g.mlt.,1
of i-,omc inn, but e,en lh&lt;'n I Wcl'&gt; di\1tubcd by the .. ight
1o6
of the yqung lovers, the Chinese lantern,; and fireworks,
and the 'ccling of love in he air whi&lt;.h always hovers
ov,·r town'&gt; on i,ummcr &lt;.femng,;.
It was wont of all Jhen Tcir.cr al"', went awav to
pc:nd his holidays with Brigi11c walking amclty"; the mun­
taius. I le im, itt·d m&lt;· to come: along too, and he meant
it scriou,1, although mv inabi1it to move about easily
would have· ,poilt hii, pk,1'urc; but I wuld not acc.ept
hh irnit;.1tion.
For t\\o ycek, 1 n·mai1 cd in town alone, miserable
and l. ·,able 10 o,fhp, and I did 1101 male any further
prore.,., ?vi1h m, worl.
Then Gertrmk ','Ill rill' a .. mall box full of Alpine
ro'le'I from 3e \illJt in \\'alli ... \\"ht'n I '&gt;aw her hand­
writing aml unpa&lt;ll'd thl· hro"nhh, fading flowers, it
    </p>
    <p>
     w,,r,, likt a glanu· ftom her dc,ir cw-. ;md I fdt a,hamcd
of Ul ,Ll!ilatio11 an I l,1c I,. of confhlt."nu· I clec1cled it was
h·ttcr for lu·r to !..now how I felt, Jnd tlH· nc·,t morning
I wrote htr ,1 ,hurl lettt·r. I told her hc1lf-joli11gl that
I u,ul,' r &gt;l -.lt·t·p .uul that it wa,· thro111th louing for
h&lt;'T, ... l tha1 I coul,I no lont·r ju.-.t he friendl with
ht·r. a-. I wa, in lt&gt;H' with he1. While \\ riting I wai, again
o,·erum1c h, Ill\ tnu,1ion, ancl the letter, whith had
i.t,trltd mildh ,md almmt je,tingh. ended impctuousl
autl ardcnth.
Almrn,t cH·r&gt; dJ\ the pn,1 brought mt· 1,rrt-ctings an,I
pi&lt;.tutl-pm1tard-. from till' Teher,. who naturall ·could
not J..uow th,tt their ur&lt;l, ,md letter, hroughr--me dis­
appoi11tml'lll ead1 time, for I w,n waitin for post from
someone diic·.
It t,1me at l.1,t, ., &lt;·, t·nvelopt' with Gutrude's clear,
flo\\ing handwriting on it . md in,;idc wa-. a frtter.
Wj
M ' dear friend,
Your letter has embarrassed me. I re,iisc thal
    </p>
    <p>
     you are i,uftering, olherwr.· I would scofd OU for
attacking me in this wa . You I.now I am very
fonc\ 6f OU, but I am quite contt'nted wilh mv
pre,c.·r.1 state and have .&amp;'!i Cl 110 dc-,irl' to change.
it. If I thought there wa,; am d,rng,·r ol lo,ing
OU, I would do c.veq1hing po.,.,iblc IO prevent it.
But I c.111 ghe no tc-ph to your ardent ltttc1. Re
pJtic.111, let thing, 1·cmain helwc.·cn tl'l .1, the.· wc-n·
until we can 'lc.c. ,·.uh &lt;&gt;1hc.·1 Jg,1lla Jnd 1,1U,..chi11g-.
o,er. E,·erlhing \\ill thc.·n be c.·.1-.i,·1 ,,.
Yom, ,tO&lt;·&lt; tirm,u,·h.
Gc.·111,ml,·.
It hJd ,lltt·tnl the.· pmilion H'I\ littlt· ,mcl H'I the ll·ttc.·r
made me happier .. \hc.·1 JII, ir \\,t., .1 i.;u·,·1111 fwm het:
she had permitted ml' to 111.11.l' .1 dc·d.11 .111011 of lnH· Jml
h;v.l noL snubbed me. I he kttc.·1 ,tho -.c,·mcd 10 hrin
some of her pcr-.r,nalil \\ilh ii. ,omc of h,·1 ,1111111,1 cool
,-weetne. and imt&lt;·,ul of tht im.1t· of hc.·1 \\hida 111, Ion
ing had c1cat&lt;:d, ,he \\,1, .1g.1in III Ill\ 1hnuh1, ,.., hc.·r n·.11
self. Htr glanu '!iecrm·d 10 ,1,I. 101 c 011hd, Ill c. 111 mt. I kit
    </p>
    <p>
     as if !lhe were ne.ir me .md immuh.1h h I \\J., ,l\\,tH' of
both ,hame and pridt·. It hc.-lpcd 1111 10 compu·1 m, 101-
menting longing'! and to ,upprr·-. .. Ill\ hm 11111 dt·,irc,.
Vncomfortt'tl, but ,11,·nthe1wd, .1111I mmc· i11 c.11111111.md
o myi,elf, 1 held Ill\ hc.·ad high. I ob1,m1t·d ,1t&lt;n111111od.11io11
in a vil,,-ge inn, two hour, lfol\'l'lling dl'llamt· hom the
town, and tool m wmk with me. I .,JI mecli1Jti11g ,l g1c,11
deal in the ..,h,ldc of .i f,ukd lil.ic-hmh .iml 1hough1 cp1itc
often about m\ life. How ,trJngc and lom·I&gt; wa, 111\e
path in liffl and how uncert.1in Ill dc,tinc1tion' Nn-
108
where djq I have any roots and a place I could really
nil home\ I only kept up a iuperficial relation'ihjp with
my parentJI with polite k'-tl'n. I had even given up my
occupation in order to Indulge in c.rcating hatardou'i
fantasies, which did not c.ornplctcl· i,ati'lfy rne l",t:y friends
did not n·ally understand me. Gertrude \Ill\ the only
person with whom I could ha,,· had a complete under­
standing ,md a p&lt;J feet rd:11 iom.hip. And Wah I not juht
&lt; hao,ing hhadow., and building ca,tlt-, iu the air with the
    </p>
    <p>
     .work for which I liv,.-d and whi&lt;h iilu,uld ha,e given
meani118 10 fll life;, Could it 1c,tll ha,c a meaning
and juhtih ,md f:tll a per-.on\ lik, thiti building up o!
ouncl patttru,; and the C'"'-&lt;.iling pla, with im,tgc.,, which
al tht" hto,t Wiuld lll'lp ,,ther pc,,plc to pa._,, .t plca,;anl
hour?
'\;1,·trthele,'!, I ,rnrJ...ed f.ti1 h haul aain during that
,ummu I &lt;omplt:t&lt;·d thl· opC'ra itmardl, c,cn though
1tu;rc w,1,; ,till rnmh l,1cJ...ing in detail and onl .t ,;ma,'1
part of it had been written 0111. qm&lt;·ttmc·., it gave me
gr&lt;'at p1 ,11rc ag,tin .md I th&lt;&gt;UAht with pride how Ill
work \,,,uld h.1u· power O\l'r pt·npk. how o;ingers and
mu,iciam. conductor'! and choru"c" would ha,c to act
in a&lt;nmlJncc with m, wi-.hc,. ,md how thl' opera would
haH· an dk&lt;t on thml'laml, of people .. \1 other times it
!lt't'nlt'd &lt;1uit,· &lt;·,11,1ordin:tr .. 11&lt;l nightmari,h to me that
all thill power and emotion ,hould arise from the restles,
drr.nus .rnd imagin.uion of .1 poor loneh man ":hom
c,·tqone pitied. :\t other timc!I I lmt rouragc tcW,. and
fdt that m,· oper,1 would never he pcrfornud, that it wa-.
    </p>
    <p>
     all unreal and c,.tggtratt.J. Bm this feehng was r.trc:
i11 my heart I was rm.vinnd of the &lt;111alin and strength
of tn worJ.... It was ,imt'Il' aml .intent: it ad been
l&lt;!t
experienced and had blood in its veins, and iJ I do not
want to hear it any more nowad.iys and ;rite quite
a different kind of music, thet·e is, nevertheless, aJl my
youth in that opera. Whenevd, I hear melodies from it
again, it f 'hh if a mild 1,pring storm drifts across to me
from the at"mdoned v.iller, of Outh and pai,sion. And
when I thin that all its strength .md power over peoplt
was born of weaL.ncs.,, prh ,ltio11 and longing, I no long,·r
know whether m, whole life ,ll that time, and ,ll\o at
present, c.in be &lt;Jllcd h,1pp, or 'iJd.
Summer w.i., ,lppro,uhing it, l0nd1 One dd-night,
during a heJ,,. tcmpl'&lt;iluom downpour of r,un. 1 lmi.,Jwd
writing the owrturc The follo\\in mornin. thl' r.iin
wa,; r,light and l0&lt;1I, the ,i.., .tll l'H"ll gre,. \lld the gJrdtn
had bctome aummn.11. I pJ&lt;l..t·d m, po.,.,t  .,,iom .m&lt;I
went bac L. to to\\ n.
    </p>
    <p>
     Among m, Jc-quJint.imc,, 'J li.,t·r .md hi, ,i.,tt.r \\t'rc.·
tlte onl oneh \\ho had ,lhl,ul rc.·turntd 'J ht·, hoth
looJ..ed ,en \\l'Il .md ,unhurnt .,flu hum .1111,m tht·
mountain'!. The h.ul h.i&lt;l ,l &lt;,urpri .. ing numhl't of t''\.J&gt;U·
ientcs on their tom ,mcl H't thl'\ \\&lt;t'H H.n mtrrc.·,tt&lt;l
and exdted tu J..now huw m, opc.·1.i "·'' ptogH·,.o,ing \\'c
went through the merturc .md it "·'' quite ,1 J.,'lt'.tt
uioment for me.· \\hen Tcir,cr put Jnr, h,md on 111, r,houldcr
and said: "Look, Hiigittl', ht·H· 1r, J rt·Jt mmici.m'"
De11pite all m, H·,m1ing .1ml .n dmn. J .iw,utc·d
Gcrtrude'r, rerurn \\ith grc.,tt t.1&lt;·1t1c.,, ,,., I h,ul .1 IJrgc
amounr of \\lrl.. to r,ho\\ h,·r  L.m·w 1h.1t r,hl' would
take a ke&lt;·n intctc'&gt;l in it, ,mcl 1mdc.r.,t,111cl .md 'Jljm it
all .t.s if it were her 0\\11. \hm&lt; .111. I \\,1., ,m,iom, to
see Hcinrih Muoth. \\hor,c. hdp '"'" t'\\cntiJl to me Jnd  fro1ri whom I had nl5t heard for months.
lJO
Finally\ he arrived, before Gertrude's return, and
walked ir-.o my room one morning. He looked at me
searchingly.
"You look terrible,". hcf 'iaid i.haking hi head. "Well,
    </p>
    <p>
     when one composes music like that!"
"Have you ltX&gt;ked al your parti'"
"Looked at it? I know it b heart and 'will ing it as
soon as you wii-h. It's wonderful music!"
"Do you really think soi''"
"I do. You have been doing your finest work. Just
wait! Your modd-atc. fame will be a thing of the past
when you/ opera i'i performed. \\'ell, that"s your affair.
\Vhen do OU want me to "ingt There arc one or two
poi111s that l8wam 10 mention. How far arc you with
the whole opera:-..
' ,bowed him 111 \H&gt;rk. and he I hen took me to his
rooms. l"herc. for tht· hri-t time I heard him sing the
part for which I had alwas had him in mind duriiag
the play of rm own emotiom. amt I kit the power of
my m 1&lt; md his i-inging. Onl nuw c.ould I visualise
the wi.,ult-opera on 1he stage, nnl now l'onld my own
flame reach mt and let me feel it'I warmth. It was as
if the opera did not hc.-lon to me. a-i if it had never been
1ity work, but tha1 it had its own life and had the effect
    </p>
    <p>
     of an external power over 111c. 1-·or the first time I felt
this scn'le of detachment of a work. from its creator, in
which I had not pn·,ioush n·alh hclic\"ed. M··work
bc.·gan to stand there, mo\"e and show signs o{ hi! while
I still held ii. and alreadv it was not mine: it was like a
diild that had grnwn tal;er than its father: it lh·ed and
acted of its own atcl.rd and l&lt;Klked at !UC indndently
through its own l"'CS; yet it bore my name arul a resem-
111
bl.mce to me. I had this dual, almost frightenb1g feeling
with other works later.
Muoth had learned the part wery well, and l was easily
·able to give my agreement o the slight alterations
which heiit-sired. He then enquired about the soprano
part, whicl-..he onl-partly knew, ancl wishcc.l 10 know
whether a sr .. ger had yet tried it. For 1hc first time I
had to tell him about Gertrude, and 1 managcc.1 to do
so quietly and l·asually. He knew 1hc name &lt;1uite well
although ·he had nc,·cr bcl'n to lmthor's house. He was_
surprised to hear that Gertrude hact studit'd the part
    </p>
    <p>
     and could sing it.
"She must have a good H&gt;kc," tw o;aid approvingly,
"high and swel:l. \\'ill you take m&lt;.· then, some tiuu?"
"I inu;ndcd to ask thl·m if you n,ulcl c·om&lt;.· in any rnse.
1 should like to fl'ar you ,ing wiLh l\lis,; lmthor orKc or
twice: some corn·ctiuns will be m·c·cssar. :\s ,;cKm ao; thl·
Iwthors an· bat·k in town. I will ask them."
"You're a lud fellow n·all. Kuhn .. \111 Tci,er will
be able to help you with tht ordtc'ilr:tlio11. The· opl·ra
will be a succ:css, \Cna'll s&lt;.·&lt;."
I did not say an thing. I had as yet no thoughts about .
the future arid the fate of my op&lt;.·ra: first nf all it mus1
be finished. But !linre I had heard him sin it, I al,o
belic,·ed in the power of my worl...
\\'hen I told Teisc·r about it. he i.aicl 1,rrimly: "I «111
.belic\·e. you. Mundt has trem&lt;.·ndous &lt;·nergy. If only he
wasn't -1'&gt; supt·rfidal. He n&lt;'wr n·ally &lt;·art'!&gt; about the
music, only ahcml himself 1-k is a n&gt;mpl&lt;·le &lt;·goist."
On the day that I went to sc.·e Gc.·rtmde, who had at
last returned. my heart beat more quickly as I wall..&lt;'d
    </p>
    <p>
     through t garden of the lmthors' house in its autumnal
112
g,ub, w1tt1 the I, ,t\&lt;.\ .tlrt,t&lt;h hurnmng 10 fall But \he
t,unc tow\rd., rn&lt;. ,nulmg, lool..111i; ,t lurk -.unhurnt dnd
more ht,wuf 11I Jllcl gr.u &lt;.If ul t hell t., &lt;.r ',he tu Id out ht.r
h.md to me, ,.mcl 110 eft ..11 ,01&lt;c hu lmht qc, dnd her
whol&lt;· d1,u11uru 11.1,111JI m..11111u m1111uh.n&lt;l,;h&lt;.\\1t&lt;hcd
me ,lilt.\\ I i;l.1dh put JII\ ,orro,\, 111d de.,,, ., ,1'1d&lt;. and
w,10, h,1pJH to Ill m l11r ,00!1111 111&lt;.\lll&lt;&lt; fo.un ',he. lt.t
me 1,1!..e th. le. ul t11d 1, I &lt;maid 1101 br1114 111\',{f to
mc.11t1011111, ltll&lt;r ..and IIH n 11111&lt; of 11 ,he .11,o ruu,uned
\Ihnt ,1ho11111 md 111 110 ,,.1, 1111h, lied II\ her hch.i,10ur
th,ll our fr u 1111,111T, I\ 1, m 111, 1, 1 ,pod1 or m d.1ngu
'll dul m\t II\ 111 1\oHI llll ,IH ,, 1, oftc.n alone \\llh
nu . ,1' .,Ju ,, ... , emd111&lt; 111 th.11 I ,,,11ild ,, ,1,ce1 hu \\t,h&lt;..,
.md nol HP'-'J 111, dul1r111011 of 'nH u11Ic,, ,h&lt;. cncour
.ii;c d me \\ 11ho111 ,, 1,1m Ill\ LIIIH 1\1 \\Lill throuh
,, , or I ol the I 1,1 ft\\ morHh, .111d I told hu th 1
\tuoth 11, I I 1111 cl Iii, llf 111d 1,111,ed 11 I ,t,led hu
pu1111..-.w11 to h1111 111111 tll{11 1, 11 ,, 1, l"&lt;.11t1.1l S..r
    </p>
    <p>
     me to o 1hro1qh lioth p1111opil puh \\tth thun
toc 1he  1 cl ,he  t\ 1 hu ,qll, 1111 111
I .1111 uot clmrq ,o \\ 1ll1111\ ,ht , ud \ ou !..no"'
th.11 I m H r ,m 101 ,11 lll't h md hrt111 &lt;. Hunne h
l\.1uuth 11 \\Ill he d1111hh J&gt; 1111111! 111d not Jmt hu.iue
ht 1-. ,t  tmou, ,111e I I hut 1, ,01111 thm .1hout hun
th.11 fr1htt m mt 11 It 1,1 n the ,t tt \nH, l\ \H !I
'tle hem 11 m-.
I ehd 1101 Hlllllll to de le 11d 111d pi 11,c m, Inc nd I did
not ,,.1111 to nuJ...l hlr ful eHn mort 1.mlnn.1,,e1..1 1 v.a-.
cor1,111e e cl th.ll ,tftll tht ln,1 !llllt ,he ,,mild \\Jlhn\"h
,111 \\Ith 1nm .u..un "t H 1.1I d,I\, l.tto \111111 J. 111d I \H 111 thut .me! \HTl'
rt&lt;CJHd ll\ our ho,t \\Ith t,'1e I' pohu1t,, .m ll\tn&lt;.
I I l
He had never shown the slightest objection  my fre­
quent visits and my friendship with Gertrude Ind would
have laughed if ,myone had bid anything agahHt it.
He was less pleased about Muofb coming, but the latter's
manner W\S very polisht'd ,md wrrcc.t ,md bo1h the
lnithors we agrce.ibl ,urprii.cd. The foru:ful, airogant
    </p>
    <p>
     singer with a bad reput,ltion c.ould beh.tvt irrcp1oach­
ably. Al:,o he w,t' not ,.iin and dcddt·d in hi, opinion',
but modc:,t.
"Shall we :,ing?" asL.cd Gertrude .thc1 a whik Wt
stood up and went .tun,, to thc mu,1t'room. I ,.tt dcrn,n
at the piano, s.iid a few word, .tbuut the itft1oduc1ion
and scene. gc1vc i.ome d1rcc tiom .uul I hc·n .a..L.td Gt11111dt
to begin. She did c,o, ,mging ,oil h in ,1 -.. u .tim"&lt;I .rncl
careful mc1nncr. On 1hc othl·r h.md, \\ht·n 11 \\.t., '.\luo1h\
turn to i.ing, hl' did ,o .doucl \\llhout he,11.11 icm 111 ,t'II
comciou .. nN,, c..tpth.11cd u, both .iucl m.iclt· u, t·ntt·r lht·
i.'frit o the mm1&lt; ,u th,11 Gt·1 u udt· 110\\ ,1I'&gt;&lt;, ,.mg with
out rei.traint. !\fuoth, \\ho"" u,tcl lo llt·.ttmg l.uhc, of
good famil ,en form.1lh, ouh 110\\. p,ucl Jllt·ntiou to
her, lii.tcncd to htr ,111gi11i;-with intt·n·\I .mcl l''-P"-'""''''
hi11 admiration in c11&lt;.omc1gml{ but not e,.1g!{er.m·d \1101&lt;1,
From that time c11l p1t·1ud1tc., ,c1ni,tlt'd, thc· 11m.,1&lt; cl1t0\\
ua toi;-ethc1 J.nd m,1dc u, m1glc mmdecl. \111 Ill\ \\orl
that lc1 thc1&lt;" hc1lf de.id in 11npt·rfec.1h ,m11wtttd pc1th
continued to c1o;.,ume lhe -,hc1pc of c1 \\. holt· .md In ing
    </p>
    <p>
     thing I now L.ncw thc1t the chief pc1tt of Lhc wmL. wc1.,
done, 1Tiat thC'1c ".,., nothing of impm 1.11u ,. th,1t , oultl
spoil it, and 11 ,ccmcd good 10 me· I dul not conu·c1l m,
pleai.ure and gratcfull thanktd hoth m, fr ieml,. Muo1h
and l lefr..Jhe hou.,c in a fe\tive mood .tnd he tn,uc:d mt·
to ar-unexpt.-c.tcd c.clclJrc1.1ion mcc1l .1l the inn where ht
114
was staying. While we drank ,hampagnc, he did some­
thing tha he wa'I a little afraid to do; he addrer,r,ed me
as an intimate friend aml c.ontinut:d to do "°· Thi
pleased mt and had my ippt m aJ.
"Here we aH· cnjoiug oureht·., .md tclcM'ating," he
o,aid laughing "aucl I thiuk i1 I', ., ood iclc-t"to do it in
ad\'amt·. 'J h.11 1, th&lt;' b1·,1 1w11· \f1&lt;rw.1r.i, thing., i,eem
difl"rent. You .1n· goi111.\ to ht· in the limelight, \Oung
frllow, :uul I hop&lt;· It dot,n't '&gt;Jl'HI Hill a., it doc., mo'il
J&gt;e&lt;&gt;pk.'"
C,crtruck \\,,._ ,.II ill ,ll &lt;.1,t· ,-.ith !\fuoth for a long
time. and oJllh \\ 1111&lt;-,in\_\i11g \\ilh him \\d'&gt; ,ht n.1tural and
umt·,uai11t·d II&lt;" "·" H'J\ pol111· ,rnd comid1·r,ttc, and
    </p>
    <p>
     gr.iclualh ,cr,rudl \\,h gl.11I to ,u him ,tnd imitcd him
t·.i.d1 Ulllt' 111 ., h It ndh l.1,h1011 to c 11111t .,g.1111, ju,t a !ihe
,1: 1 "ith 111&lt; fht·occ,1'&gt;11111'&gt;011 ,...luth tht·thrccofu.,\\ere
alo11t· to:.o·lhtr \\lle 1,11e, hut tlu p,uh \\l"Tl then pr,l&lt;­
tiwd arnl d1,1 \l',,ul I lu l111thnr-. h,i.l H·,umed th.&amp;;.ir
\\ intu g,11 ht·t 111:/., ,.,, 11 h ll :.:1il,11 1111,,11 .. 11 t H'ning, at whit h
!\luoth ,fr. 11 ,tppt .nul h111 \\llhout rn,1kmg am tontri­
butinn tn thl 111
.\t tim&lt;·, I 1hough1 1h,ll ,1nrud, ,,.1, bcguming to be
mon· ll',l'tHd ,-.tth 11H ,11ul th,11 ,hl ,,.1, to '&gt;Orne c,tcnt
&lt;lr,1wi11 .,w.n from mt· llmH H 1 1 Jlv..iH rq&gt;ro,t&lt;..hed
JU\'&gt;l'H for thl'"· thouhh .md \,,,, .i-.l1.1med of m, .. uspi
cioni.. G1·1 trudt· \\,1, HI\ mm h 111 dt'r11.rn1l .,., the mi'&gt;tres,;
ot ,l hmht' wht·a· 111u1h t111c11.1111i11 ,,,.., clone, and it
oftln .l\t: m&lt;· plt,1',lllt Ill "'l' hl'I llHlH' .1hout ,,tid ,lC't
a" ho,ll''' .1mor1g,1l111 g.m,i... lool..mg ,o ,nun. t.h,uming
and r:u mu,.
I he "ed., p.i.,.,cd ,n H'l\ 1p1111..h f,,1 nw I worked
at nn op&lt;·r.i., wh1d1 I hopt·d IO hnih dmmg 11'e winter.
l l ",
    </p>
    <p>
     I h.id meetin with Tei&amp;er, and spent m,m evening-.
wuh 1nm and hi'I r,nter rhen there were clll 'H&gt;rt'I of
lettcn and inc1denh, ar, mv r,ongs \\ere &lt;,ung .it different
pl.1ce1t, c1nd all the &lt;,tlmg mu11c. I h.ad compmc·d w,11,
pl.ted m 'berlm fherc \\ere enqm1u·, c1nd tll'wo,p,1pe1
1evie\\'I, ,m\.. r,uddcnh t,cnone 'lt'emt.d to kno" th,u I
was \\Orlmg't,.1 .tn opc1c1, ,lltbough .1pc1r1 from Gtt1aude,
the Te10,eri. .tnd l\luoth I h,1d not .,,ml .1 word .1huut 11
to anone It dul not 1tc1lh m.tttlf, .md mwc1rdh I w,1&lt;,
happl c1bou1 the,e ,um of ,uc.cc,, It .,, emcd .1, ,r .al
lc1,t, and ,et ,uc,n cnouh .1 p.ith I.,, opt n htlo1&lt; me
I had not he&lt; n to m, p,,nnt, hotN. fm ., '" hol, H..ir
.rnd I l\l'lll there for C h11,tm.1, \h mothtt \\,h .1tlu
uonate, but theH ",.., tht olcl , c,u u ht'l'\ t ll m "hu h
on Dl ,1dc \\ ,1, ,l f c. ,11 of be m 1111,mulu .,,oocl .111d cm
her '1de .1 lacl.. of futh mm, c.,ru, .1, , 111mu1111 .md
d11tbehe m tlu.. ,u 1011',n&lt;. .,., uf 111, uulc .1, mu., \ht no\\
tallcd .uum,llt dh .1hou1 \\ h.n .. tu h.ul lu u d uul H ,ul
.,bout mt. but mmc.. to l{IH m&lt; pit 1,m, th.111 horn
con,u.uon. for lll\\,udh ,tu llll'lllll',tul lh&lt;.,c. ,1p1&gt;.1r&lt;.nt
    </p>
    <p>
     o,uccco,o,.', cl'i mmh .1, m, ,II l .1, J \\hol&lt; It \\.l, not th.11
'lhe clad not hlt 11111&lt;,u mdud .11 om I mu ,ht u,I to
&lt;,1ng J ht1lc, but 111 ht I op1111on .1 11111.,,, 1 111 ,, .., .1 pout
'I01t of po,on \ht h.ul .,l.,n ht .ml -.emu 111 111, mmu
c1.nd dul not undu .. t.md or &lt; .iu for It
l\h t.1th&lt;.r h.id mon fc11th \&lt;, 1 me r, h,1111 ht thouhl
,1.bo,e .ill of m, mc1tt11c1l .. u«&lt;., .uul .,lthoui;h he h,ui
,tl\\d\'&gt;nen me J guurou, .11lm1r mcc.· \\1thou1 rumh
hog, ,1ncl &lt;,met. I h.id ldt I ht· · ore ht "" .i h ul J.1111
contmued to -.upporL me fulh, he \\J'I gl,ul to ,u· that I
wa, bcgmmng 10 cc1.rn monc', .iml that thut \\t re
prospeu,/Wf 111,1.kmg c1 Ii, m b, m, 0M1 t fforr.. Jl:n mg
116
m.adc mony himM:lf, he reg.ardc.d th1., cl\ an C\\Cnll.al
ba.,i., for c1 tl'&lt;1pe&lt;.tr1hk cxi,tc.nc.&lt;" He "cl&amp; rn bed when I
.u1ned. He h.ul hc1d cl fall on lhc day IJ&lt;.l01e Ill\ clrr1ul
.md had in1urcd .t foot
Ht ,l'l 111 ,l ,hgh1h plulmopluc.il mood I &lt;,tine. &lt;.lo-,er
10 bun 1han mu.ii r1nd \\,1, 1111c.H,1c.d III h,. prc1c.U&lt;cll
ontlooL. on hie I \\cl\ r1hh to tt 11 111111 W1&lt;1m of m,
    </p>
    <p>
     uoubll.,, \\h1c.h I had m,tr dom 1m,1ou'&gt;h bc.c.iu\t: of
cl \Cn,c of b,1,hfulm.,., \01m thllll! \fuoth had one.&lt;. ,,ud
&lt;4&lt;.uncd lo mt .md I ll pt,lll d 11 10 Ill\ f.itho \luoth
h,ul ,,ud, not 11,tll 111 c,11111,t 1h11 Ill 1hou!{ht ,outh
",1, till' mmLlhfhc uh tum of Ith .md he fouucl th,11 mo .. 1
old pc.op!&lt; \\ 1 It mm h more ,Lrc m .mcl c ontultt cl thclu
OUII pc oplt  \h f 11hu IJuh, d Jt thJt r1nd ,sc11d
thoughtfulh  !\Jlt11,1lh \H old pcopk '&gt;cl\ JU'!II the
or: '''t' but 1hu1 1, .,nmc 11111,1 111 \\hll ,0111 tnuul
,r11d I ll"nJ.. out &lt; lll dr,m rpuh .1 d1,u111 t t11,1,1u11
lll .. t\\Ull \Ollth .md 111.11111n, ,,,111h uul, \\hen LOlb\
dot,, m,1ll1r1t, ht1.;111, \\lun om lnt., lm 111hcr" lhJ'"'
\\h,u I r ,l' t. \ 01111..; I" oplt. h t\l 111 ,n, plt.J,ltrt., J.nd
m,m, ..cnrim'I, htc,111,t thl\ unh h,1H 111tnh&lt;.hc, to
thml. uf, ,ntHn \\l'&gt;h u11lpc1\ 110110111"'umc., 11npm
tJ.nu &lt; H r \ pit 1'UJl 1, I 11t d 10 th&lt; I 1111 hut .1h,o l. H,
\Olin\\ ,mcl IIIJII\ \\ho h Ill 1h.11 1hur \\l',ht, &lt;J.lllleh ht.
fulhllul, 1mmuh,llt h put 111 nd to then In e, I h,t
1, hun ,01111 I II mmt pu&gt;plt ho\\&lt; H r lht n c oml\
c1 tmu \\htn tlu ,11u.1111111 thni..;t, ,,ht11 tht, ll\c mou..
    </p>
    <p>
     for othu, 1101 £01 .111, ,11111011, ll,ho11, hut qmtc. .uu
alh \ tJ1111h 1, tlu n ,1"on "uh mmt ptnph. Ont.
thml, It·.,., .1hmn om ,t lf .mcl om ., "1,ht·, \\ ht n ont hcl'!I
c1 f,muh Othu, lmt tlun t.ou,111 111 1 lt''&gt;pom1hle
po\ltaon. m pohno, m J.11 01 111 ,t ll nu \ uunt pt.oplc
ll'.
want to pla; mature people want to work. 1-man does
not marry ju11t to h.1ve children, but 1f he doe11 have
them, they thange him, and fmalJy he 11en th.tt every­
thing ha11 happcnl"d j1nt for 1hcm l h.1t hnl..., up with
the fJ.c.t lh,1t OUllF, peoplt· lil..t to t,111.. .,bout dc..1th but
do not rt.\lh thml.. .1bout H It 1., 111,t the othc1 w.1v
1ound wuh"\ Id people l ifc &lt;,eem., long to \oung people
.tnd they &lt;.dll theretmc tome. ntr.itt ,111 then w1\hc11 .ind
thoughb on thcrw,t h C'!I Old pc.oplt ,ire. t 011\ltous of .m
approadung end, .md thJt eHr\lhmg th,tt one h.i., .m,:1
doe11 for one11eU hn.ilh £.ill, 11h01 t .11uPl.1c.l.., \.1luc.· I herc­
fore. a 111,111 r eqmrt, f.iuh .1ml ,ometh11 t"l,c th,u
contmuc.,, he. dot, not \\ml.. Jll"t for the \\orm, 'M&gt; durc.·
arc: wife ,llld duld, h1Nnt,, mcl 1e,p&lt;mitJlnh1, .111d the
    </p>
    <p>
     n.iuon to 1u,t1f thed.11h 1011 ,111d 11101I In th.it rt,pc.&lt;t
l&lt;&gt;ur friend i., ,1mt&lt;. ruJu, ., 111.111 .., J1,1pp1e1 whc. n he
lhes fm othe,., th.111 \\hua ht 1m1 hH, for hnmdf, hut
rl people !lhould not m.11..t \Uc.la ., ,ntut nt ll, bu.1mc
It im't one re.,alh lu ,m, c,10,e, th&lt; mmt ll\t h ,oun
people become the bc,t old peopl&lt;. not thm&lt; \\hn prctcud
to be J.i. WN " 1.mdf,uhu, \\lulc. thu J.r&lt;· 11ull .it
'l&lt;hool"
I remained ,ll home. for ,1 ,u.c.l.. ,rnd ,.ll ,1 1-,'TC J.t dt.11
at my father\ ht·d,1dc. He. \\cl., 1101 ., p,1t1cnt 11n.1hd.
6eiirdes, c1pc1rt from tht ,m.1ll t111un to Im fnor he. ""
in o.ccllcnt hc,tlth I told huu 1 "" ,011, th,11 I h,td not
11ho\\ n more c.onfulc. nc t' .nul eh ,l\\ n do..,_r to Jmn p1 e
"1ouffl, but ht 1em.1rl..cd th,ll th.11 c.ould ht .,,ml for hoth
de.,, and our rc.l.t.t1ou-.l11p m thc.,tuturc \\ould ht bc..ttc.r
than 1f we had 111.1dc. prun,uurc. attempt-., \\lnc..h r,uch
\uccecd, to undcr-,tand each otht·t In c1 d1M re&lt; t ,md
kind wa he ,1r,l..cd me .tbout m, J.tlllmlc tow.ircl11 women
118
I did not w,mt to ,c1y .1.nvrlung about Gertrude; what I
    </p>
    <p>
     did tell him wa, very bncf
"Don'I worry," ':laid ·111 father ,nuling, "&gt;ou are the
type to make .i re.tit good hu.,h,md, mtclhgent women
will '10011 notic.e thJI Onl&gt; be. Wolf of women of o;mc1ll
mc.tn, who mc1, be Jftcr 1,our mom, And 1f vou do not
hnd the one th,tt \ou, mi-..tg&lt; .1.11d thmk HAi \\ould hke-,
it  ., .. ull 1101 dhc.1,1rou., Lene btt\\t'&lt;.n ,oung people
.mcl love ,tftc.r mc.1111, ,c..th of mJrn,tg&lt;. I'&gt; not rhe o;ame
tJ11 ng \\ h&lt;11 on, 1' , ou nA, one h t., rmh one.,ef to thmk
of ,md ,.uc. for, h111\\h&lt;.n thu&lt;. 1., J home.hold, th&lt;.rc. c1re
orh&lt; r th111,10 .tlll 11d to I h 11 1, ho\\ It \\cl'&gt; \\Ith me. a-.
'tOLl \\tll l..110\\ I.,.,,,., HI\ much m 10\c. v.1th ,our
morhu 11 "· ,t ll 1I loH m ud1 But 11 onh l,1,1,d a
\t,tr 01 t\\o, then 11111 JM't1011 rhul do\\11 .md \\3'&gt; cllmmt
,r, 1 uul \\&lt;. h,trdh k11t" ,du 1&lt;.0\\t ,tnod m rd.1uon to
c.uh otl1u I illn tht d11ldn11  tlllt ,om l\\O dder
,1,1u, \\ho d1«I \dun the, \Hll ,oun-4 ,md .,.,, had tlM!911
to look .1f1e1 Om dtm,uul, on t UIJ other \\Cre c.on,t
«1u&lt;11th ,&lt;.., th&lt;. u,olm,., hct\\Hll u tclme to ,m end,
.uul .,uddtnh Im, \\,1, rho&lt;. .1.1111 to bt mn·. It wa,; not
    </p>
    <p>
     the old Jou.-, but ,mm thlll!.\ q1111e n&lt;.\\ 1 lw, hJ't rem.ud
&lt;.'\er '&gt;lll&lt;e ,u1hou1 rnuh11!, mmh Tt\J\lll!.\ fm more thcln
th1rt\ H,n, .:\ot .111 Im&lt;. lllJtd1" turn out cl \\ell,
md&lt;t.&lt;l. H 1, le\\ do
I o ml' ,111 tht, ob,tn.111011' \ll\l.'cl no purpose. but
the nc\\ ,onh,il 1d,1t10n,l11p \\llh m, fclthc-r en&lt;.our.ig-ed  mt ,nul 111.ult lilt ,l!,\Jlll 1.111m m, hmm tcmar&lt;l., \\hl{h
I h,td felt nuhtfc.tl 111 durmg- th&lt;. p1&lt;,1 fc.w \CJ.I, \\ he-n
I depclrtcd, I dul not fl'!.\ l't the , 1,11 and deoded to
l..et·p 111 more f1c.&lt;1m 111 &lt;.olltJ&lt;.t \\Ith th, old ople m
future
119
Work and travelling for the performances of.my string­
music prevented me from visiting the Imthon for a
while. When I went there again, I found that Muoth,
· who had previously only goneathere in my company, was
now amongst the most frequently in\'ited guests. Mr.
lmthor still treated him moll· and rather distantly. but
Gertrude sct"focd 10 ha\'e btcome good fril·nds with him.
I was glad about that. I saw no grounds for jealousy
and was convinct·d that two people who wen· as dissimilar
    </p>
    <p>
     as Muoth and Gertrude would i11t·n·st arnl ;1t1rat·t ea&lt;"h
other, but could not Jon· and makt' ·ad1 other happy.
So I was nor :u all s11spidn11!&gt; wheu h ,;:mg '·ith 1er and
their beautiful \'oin·!&gt; miuglcd. Thn looked at1rac1ive
together; the\" were both t.tll aud wdl-fonrtd, ht·. morose
and serious, he, bright and 'il'fl'lll'. Rl'et·nth-, however,
it seemed to mt· that !ll'tc found sc1111e diffi, uh\' in main­
taining her old innatt screuit,·. and she i.cnm·timcs stC'med
titd and distractt.-d. Quite oftt·n she looked at Ill' seriously
and searchingly, with C'uriosity and i111t·n,;1. in the way
that worried and depressed pcopk look ,ll t·:u h other,
and whtn I smiled ar her and r&lt;'sponclcl wi1h a friendly
look, her features rclax&lt;"d into a ,;mile so ,;Jowly an&lt;l in
such a forced manner. that I wa-. disturhcd.
Vet it was quite rare that I nntin·d this: at other
times Gertrude looked as cheerful and radiant as ever,
so that I attributed the!ie observation,; 10 imaination or
a passing indiposition. Only onn· wall I rt·alh shodcd.
Whi one of her guests wa'I playing scm1c UeC"tho\'en
music, she lcarwd back in the o;mi-darkncs. prohahly
    </p>
    <p>
     thinking that i.he was quire unobserved. Earlic:r, while
receiving her gm·srs in rht· full light. she had appeared
bright a';;d c·hccrful, but now, wirhdrawn into herself
12
and clearly unmoved by the mu-,k, h&lt;"r face relaxed and
assum&lt;"d an cxpn·,,ion:of wcarinc.,.,, anxiety and fear,
like that of an cxa.,pcrJ.tc:d &lt;.hild. It Ja.,ted r,evcra] min­
utcs, and when I ,a\\ it; 1' wa, '&gt;I Utml·d. Something war,
troubling hc:1. Th,tl alcm&lt;· """ had, but it worric&lt;l me
that :-.he '&gt;hould p1e1ernl lo he clwcrful and con&lt;.cal
eH·r;thing from me .. \., -.0011 ... ., th&lt;· rnu,ic \'a'&gt; hni,;hcd,
I we111 up to h&lt;·r, ,at dcm II he,ick her and began a
&lt;a,u.tl &lt;or1H-r,atio11. I ,aid 1ha1 ,he· hJd hJd a buw
in1c·r and I hJ.t I .1d .1l.,o h,HI .1 11, ing I imc, lnll m
remark'&gt; wen· 111,ul&lt;· in lih ,rnd h.11f jt .. 1ing tm1e ... Finall.
I mentioned' 1h,ll J&gt;&lt;'tiod i11 lh&lt;' .,p,in '"'hen we had
di'I&lt; u,;,cd tlw hc·11,in11in, of Ill\ opc·1,1 .rnd h,Hl plaved
and 'Id.Ilg I he1111ogc·1 ht 1
She thl'll ,.1id: "Ye·,. tlHh&lt;' \H'fl' hJpJn time&lt;,." \he
,.,HI 111J mote· th,111 1h.11. bur it '"''' .1 conft·-,,ion, for 'lhe
    </p>
    <p>
     ,aicl i I n. t h gr e,ll c·,11 m ,t Ill'""· I n·.1d i II it hope for
m,oclf ancl i11 111, h&lt;·,111 I \\,1, th.mltul
11011!,{ed tn u·pc-.,r 1h1· qul'-.tion I h:.td .,.,l..ed her dmin
the MlDIIIH"r. I Ju lit·H d ,,11h .111 du&lt;" mode-.t, that I
could H'l\lurc to i111l·rptl'I the ch.rngt· in her manner,
1hc &lt;·mh.ir,1,-.mt·111 ancl umt-rt.tin fr,u., nhid1 .,be r&lt;',e,-1
,tl -tilllt''&gt; .. 1 .. f.1, om .1hlt-,igm for me. I found iL touching
lo ,t·&lt;· ho\\ lll'r 11 ll'lh pride '&gt;Cemc·d \\oundcd and h.1rd
to di,ui,t·. I did 1101 11.nt· ,.1, amthin: her unccr1.1inty
hurt mt' and I kit I 01n.l11 10 kl'l'J&gt; m, un,poktn promise.
I han ncH·r known hm, to hdt,l\l' \\ith \\omen. I ,,1.ule
tht· ,;,1mt· mi,t,11..t· .1, Ht·imic h '.\fuoth, the other wav
round: I tn:,llt·cl women .i.. if the, were friendll.
A!i I t·H·nru.1lh could 1101 &lt;on .. idt·r m,· obenations to
he jmt illu-.iom ,me.I \l't onh h.1lf mulct tocxl G.r-trude'!'
changed manner, I htc,1mc r,.llht·r re.,ened, ,·i.,ited her
UI
less frequently .md avoided intimate c.onvcrsation-. with
her. I w,mted to "how hf't c.onsderauon and not make
her more sh, ,md fearful as she \Cemed to be 11uft'cring
    </p>
    <p>
     and in a ,tale of confti, l I thtnk she notic&lt;'d the d1angl'
in m, beh,ni&lt;&gt;ur .md did not &lt;1&lt;'&lt;'111 cti .. plc.1.,Nl th,u I
should L.ccp W dM.111&lt;.e I hopc.d rh.u ,u &lt;1J10uld .,g.1111
ha,e ., &lt;Jlllt'I. p&lt;,1&lt;t.ful unw .,ftcr till \\11lt&lt;.r ,md 'tlu-
11nenuou, t 111c1 t,u11111. ,md I ".mretl to \\,lit until th&lt; 11
But I ""' nftt.n HI\ ,ou, fm htr, ,uul Al .1du,1II I .,1,o
felt di.,turh&lt;'d .ind thouht there t'm,t be. ,omcrht
IICl'iOU\ J&gt;f'UdlllR
I wa., reo,tk" und,1 the tcm10n of rlu. &lt;n&lt;um .. t.a.n&lt;C.''I
Febru.in .irr1,c..d .ind I ht..m to 1011 tor ,pt IIIA \funth
had not been to ,u me HI\ mmh II h.ul, mdud,
h.id J 11trcnuom ,, mtu ,u tht Opu ., lfnu-.e ,md h,ul
rctcnth 1ctt.1Hd l\\o m1p011.1111 ofltr-. from \\tllJ...1111\\11
the.1trc11. ,about "hu.h lu h,ul 111 111 1L.c ,1 clu , .. um lit
di1f alOl 'll.l.lTI to h,t\l .mothll I.uh f11c. nd ,ii I&lt; ,i-.t, ,m&lt;c.
tht' htcaJ... ,urh I.01t1t I h.1d nor ,c c n .111, orhu \\om,m
ell h1, hou\C. \\c lr.id rccu11h &lt;clc.hr.11cd lu, hnrhcl.n
Sin&lt;.e th&lt; 11 I h,ul not "'t n tum
,l. no\\ felt ,m ml{&lt;. to t.tn .md \&lt;l l11111 I "'" hc.mmn
to fee the. "tr,un of m, &lt; h.m&lt; d re l.111nn,h1p "11h
    </p>
    <p>
     crtrudt, o\tr \\trL. .111cl tht l011 \\llllll .md I lnol..c.cl
him up to h,lH ,l &lt; h.it \\ 1th 11111 I ft ,I\&lt; me. J ,., .... or
c,hen, and r.,JJ..ul lU mt ,,hout rl1t th&lt; 1t1t lk ,eumd
tired .ind dl\lr,u 1«1 ,md uml\11,ilh g&lt; 111lt I h,tt nul 10
hm1,1ooJ..«I .irouncl tlu 100m ,md "'" 111,1 omg 10 ,..,1,,.
him "hrthcr he hc1d hun In tl1t"lmthm, .,g,nn, \\htn I
c1cddcntc1lh \J\\ .111 cnH lope. w11h ,c.rll ud&lt; ., h,1111l"11tllll{
on u h"1g m1 the r.ihlc. Hdmc I cuulcl H,tlh 1.1J...c II m.
a fcelmg of horror .ind b1ttunco,., "died up in me ll
IU
&lt;.ould h,lH' h&lt;·en dll IO\ll.tllon, .t o,unpl&lt; fo1tndhtv, yet I
&lt;.ould not h&lt; hcve II hovu much I mtd
I w,l'i .thlt to &lt;ompme m,,.&lt; If ,rnd left o,oon dfterwar&lt;h
Almoo,t unw1llmgh, I n.tlhc.d thc11 I kntw eventhmg
It could h.tH htu1 111 rn,11.111011 d llt\tdht,, ,;ometlung
&lt;iu1tt &lt; ,1,u,11 -\l t l knc.\\ r h.i.t It \\ 1, not uddenh, I
dc.,trh undC'J\tnod L H n thm 1 lt.i.t lud hc1ppL-md rec-c.nth
I l,,.m w I h.ul undo t,1!..&lt;.11 ro \\ 111 c111d 111..tk&lt; o,ure, but dll
m, tho11h1, 111 th1' connufton h,1d Jmt hun pre.text,;
,111.d n.&lt; mL, I he ·''-' 0\\ 111d ptlr&lt; ul du ph c111d fetc.red
    </p>
    <p>
     111 111, hlnocl \\ he 11 I r&lt;.1d1cd hmm md ,.11 111 m, room, ' ITI", &lt;rntfuo,um \\,1' .,10,\h npl111&lt;I I\ 1 fu.lm of J.lmo&lt;,t
tunhl&lt; c.ilnuu .. ., ,dnch fmilh p1u,ul11.I .uul l1lnt\\
th.tt 111, hft h.1ft 111 t 11 .,h,111trul 111d f,mh .md hope had
been de-.u °' L d
I 01 \l\&lt;'r,1I d '" I could tJ 11h&lt;r ,hrct '1 t&lt;.tr nor feel
,111", nd \\ 11hn111 th111l..111 11 m I I h ul d1c1ct«l not
to 1-o 011 ll\111 l11 11n &lt; 1,1 tl11 \\tll 1, liH h.i.d .tfflt
dom.cl JIil .111cl v11,1trl ro h,t\t ,ft.,1ppt 111d I rhouht
.thout C.:,1111-{ .1, 1 p1u1 of \\111J... 1h11 h.i.d 10 bL done.
unhC',1t,1t111h. \\llhou th111J...111g ,,tu thu 11 \\,h pka,ant
or not
,\mnng,t tht 1h111, ,,huh I" u11ul !!I clo befo1thand
"·" hr,t of di 111 go 111d \hit C,uruck to l ceuam
&lt;.,tnt fm tht ,,11..t of rndu to rut t\l tht nt&lt;e.,o;an
&lt; 011hr m,tt mn of m, ,u,pu 1011', I L11uhl h,t,c had tin,
from '1110111 hut .,lthouh hL 1ppt nu! tci he le\, to
bl,unt th,m  ,t ttrudt ] t r lllld 1101 h1111 111, ,df to go to
h1111 I \\en to 'lt'l C.,ertnuk hut did nnt hnct her Ill I
\\ent .1g,un tht folhmm d,I\ and l,tU,ul tn her and
ht·r father fm ,l ft\\ m111utt, u1111I 1hc. l.tttu left Wl&gt; alone
    </p>
    <p>
     togcthc.r, thmlm \H \\1,lud to ptol&lt;tl..e omc munc
1.n
She then stood alont' hdorc me and I looked at her
curiously. She i.ecmcd a little clAmgcd but no Jes,; beauti­
ful than ever.
"Forgive me, Gertrude." r 'i.iid firmh. "if I trouhle
,ou once more. I wrol&lt;' ,ou a letter Jming the lltttmmt·r
0t1ld I now ha,e an .m,wt.r to ii? I h.1ve to go on .1
JOurne,. pe:hap" for a Ion time, o: ht'r\\i'it' I 'ihoulcl
have waited until ,ou ,ou..,clf ... "
As 'ihe went p,1lt· anti looL.ttl ,ll me.· in ,urpt i,e. I
helped her .ind ,poke ···in: "Your. ,lll'i\\C.'I i, '110·. illtn'1
it? I thcmAht lltO. I onh \\,lilted to br «'H.lin."
She noddc.·d ,adh.
"ls1it lkinuch" I .,,L.cd
Sht' notltlt·cl ,1.1in, .ind ,udclc.·nh ,lw ,C't nlt'cl h ih u·m·d
and ..ei,cd m, hand.
"Pll'J'it.' forghe me· .mcl don't do .11nthin 10 him"
"I don't intt·nd tu. ,ou &lt;Jll rt'"' .1,,urul" I ,.ml .mcl
h'!M· to .,,mle. for I rhuuht of !\1,01.111 .uul I.ottic·. who
    </p>
    <p>
     bad .ilo,o bt·en 'iO .tll,1&lt; hc.·cl to 111111 .111&lt;1 "10111 ht· h,uf
bc.tt&lt;'n. Pe1h.1p., hr \\0111&lt;1 .,1,o lu,ll ,c.·111mh .11ul dt· .. um
her loft, pticlt· .md 11u .. 1im,.: 11.1turt
"Geruudc." I hc.·.111 ,t'!,tlll, "1hi11I.. 11 oH·t' !\ot fm
m, ,akt· I I.now now ho\\ rhi111, .,,,uul \\ith me Hm
Muoth will 1101 m.,l..c ,uu h.,pp, ,oodln,. Gt·ttrud,"
l\h fcelm of hdng hcnumhrd .uul 111111.11 ur .,lh c .,Im
pcni .. tcd. Onh now, \\ht·n Geruml, 1,,11,t·d 10 me liJ..c.·
that.Jn the '&gt;Jrnc.· tom·., 1h,1t I a·, .1llt·tl I 011it· ming. ,md
looked at me .,o a11'doml .ind ., .. ,1 · "llon't o lilt th,11
I don't dco,crve th.it from ,ou' ·. dul I kd ,.., if m,
heart wa\ brt'al..ing .iml I h.uf chf11&lt; uln in controllin
m'lf.
I :,eld out Ill\ hand to her dn&lt;I o,Jicl: "I don't w.int to
124
hurl either you or Heinrich. But wait a liule. Don't
lcr him excrdM: hi., poler mer OU. He dei.troys every­
one be ii. fond of."
She shook her head a·mt u·ll·a&lt;sed my hand.
"Good-hvc ! " ,he i.aid &lt;f Uittlv, '"it j,, nor Ill faulr.
    </p>
    <p>
     Think kincllv of mt· ,rnd c1ho of Ht·inrid1."
It wa, o\t·r. I \\tilt hom&lt;· ,mcl prou·cd,·d1,·ith m plan
as if it w&lt;.·r«· a pi&lt;·u· of worl., to be dom·. It wai. um· that
whilt I did thi, 111, hc,trt wa, hea,, and ftllcd to the
lfrim with ,orrcw,  tmt I wa .. .iwan· of it in a remote
way and It.id 110 '&gt;pc11e thrnu;hto, for it. It ,u., all the
i.amc· to 111&lt;.· "hcth,·r tht· cl,t\'i and hour., that were left
went wdl or not. J put i11 ordc1 tht· pil&lt;.· of &lt;shl&lt;; on
whid1 Ill\ haUfmi.,hed opua w,,., ,Hittcn, and wrote a
letter to Tt·i,cr to 11,0 with it "&lt;&gt; that 111 worl.. !ihould,
i! 1,,.i.ihle. h,· pu·,t·IH&lt;I. l!u111 ,c:riomh «&gt;midered
the nt.1111 r in whu h I ,hould dit·. I \\i,hcd to '&gt;p.ire mv
p.in·nt,, h111 , ould thinl of 111, 111.11111&lt;1 of chinat
would mal..t· thi, po.,,il,ll. h1 th1o. Jcmg nm, it did not
111.tttt·r .c&gt; 111m h I h11.1lh dt·t idt·cl t.1 u,t· .1 n·,oh tr. AU
tht·.,t· &lt;111t,tion, cKc unt·d to mt 1111h in J ,hadmn .inJ
unrt·al {J.,hion. I h.ul nnh ouc 11'\t d idt·,t .md th,ll ,
th.11 I c oud 1101 go on li\im. fm bthind the ril{idin of
m, tit"&lt; i,io11. J h.ul .1ht·,1,h h.ul .1 lim1N· of the horror
of tlu· lift-th.11 \\011ld umf11mt me It atcd .tt lllC'
    </p>
    <p>
     hitltou,h t h10111ah , ,lt.llH t'\l, .md it -.ccmcd much Jlore
ugh .111d ttHihm!!, th.m 1tu d.nl.. .md luum\ &lt;.once12tion
of dt·,llh.
111 tlu· ,1h,·111oon. n,o tl.,, .. l.1ttr, I "·'' rud with m
prq,.1ration-.. I '&gt;till \\,llltt·d to h.i,e a \\.111.. through the
town I h.td lO tal..t· ,l tnupk of houl..,; b.ul.. to th,_libran.
11 \\.1., .1 unnfmt to me to know that in the e,ening I
would no longer be alive. I felt ilr.e a man who has had
an accident, who is still part1i under the anae111betic
and does not feel the pain. but has a suspidon of excru­
ciating torture. He only ho1-es that he will sink. into
complete oblivion before tht o;uo;perrc&lt;l pclin be&lt;ome,;
real. That is how I fdt. I ,uffercd less from an a&lt; tual
"Pain as fronl an agoni,ing fe.1r lhat I might return to
consciousne!lll and h.i,·c 10 tmpt, the wholt gl.11,; 1hat
death. which r.llled me. W.l!t to t,1L.e .1wa, from mt. ·1 hat
wa'I why I hurried OH'r my w.ilk, JtJtndtd to whar Wi'I
nec.euar and went ,u·.1ight h,u k. l m,uk· JUo,t .i !thort
detour in order 1101 to go pa-.1 Ger1rudc\' hoU',t' for I
felt, lithout being .able to ,m,1h,c it, th.1t ii I ,.1w the
    </p>
    <p>
     hou!-e, the intolerable pJin hom "hid I ".1, !tteking
escape would OH'rwhdm .md prmtr,11&lt;· mt.
So, breathing ,l 11igh c\£ rclicl, I wt·n1 h.ic L. to lht' hou,;&lt;
in whit h I li\·cd. opt·nrcl tht g,tte ,me! wcnt immc·cfiau·h
up-:,e ,tair,, kding lightt·r of tu·.m If the grit'f WJ.'i
still pursuing me .and ,trctd1ing nut it-. c l,1v., tow,mls
me, if somewhen· within me the £11htful p.iin ,lumlcl
begin to gnaw ag.iin. there wtrt mah ,1 frw ,tair-. .md
.. :-,1nd,; bt'lwten me .ind liher,1tion.
A man in uniform &lt;J.llll' down rhc· -.t.iir, towJrd,; mt·.
Lmm,ed a,ide cln&lt;I h.i-.t&lt;"ned 10 pa,., him, frJring I rnigh1
be stopped. He then tou&lt;.hcd h1., tJP .ancl pronounu·d m,
name. 1 looled at him in ch,111,1,. l\cing .uldn· .... t·d and
stopped, which I h.id fc.iu·d, , ,m-,cd mt· to tn·mhlt-.
SudcTenlf, a feeling of exhau,tion cwerpnwtred me. I
felt that I wa11 going to fall and thlrc would bt· no hope
of making the few nect,;,;an pact"-. to rcad1 m room.
Meaf\:'hile, I ,;tared in di,;tres,; at the ,11.1.ngcr. A,; tht
feeli'lg of weak.m.s grew, I sat down on one of the
u6
    </p>
    <p>
     stairs. Tht· man ask&lt;'fl me if I wa., ill and J shook
my head. lie was hold'1g something in his hand which
he wanted lo give me and which I would not take, until
he almost fon-'d it into rr hand. I made a gesture of
rcfu,;al and said: ·1 don't want it."
He call&lt;·cl for the 1.mdl;uh hut c;hc-w,,., 1101 there. He
thcr, took me I\ th&lt;" .11111 m order to lll'li' me up. Ai;
.. 0011 a,; I ,aw th,1t th&lt;·r&lt;" \\;I', no e,capc and that he
would not ka\1· Ill&lt;' alorl&lt;'. I ,uclcknh pulled m·self
tgNher. I ,toml 11,1 and \\:tll.1·d toward:, m, room, and
he follow1;d 1111·  h I frlt t ,,11 lie lool.&lt;·,l at me c;mpi­
dou,;h-, I po111tC"d 0111 Ill\ :ujmc·cl k and pretended it
\\.t'i hurting me·. and he· l,c·li1·H·d me. I tool oftt my
pun,· and .tvehim .1 coin He· thanlc·d me and finallv
pmlwd tht· thing into m, h.111d th.u I J.ad nor wantt·d
, 1, l..c. It \\,l'&gt; a rdt·r .un
'\'1anh. I ,rood rliinl.ing II\ th, 1,thlt 1.ionwone had
now ,toppt·d m&lt; ,md In ol.t·JJ t ht· ,pell "'hat W't?
A tl'l&lt;·1.,rr.u11. 1·10111 \\hom: It \\,l'i ,111 tin ,,tnH' to me.
It \\:t'&gt; ;:ri1.,1i11g to J&lt;'!l'iH· ,t tt"lcgr.1111 jut nm,. I harf
    </p>
    <p>
     made .tll 111\ pnp.1r.11i011' .111d .11 tht l.i-t mm11ent ,c,mc
om ,l·mf.., mt .1 tl'lt !!_1,1111 I looJ..t·cl ,11 onnd. A letter .A..
on the· tahlt·.
I put tlw lt-1111 in Ill\ pocl.cr: it did not tempt me.
Hut I ,\.t'&gt; inn i:_:11l'd f., tht It ,t't..'T,tlll I tt111ld 11ot g&lt;·t it
out of 111, th11111.,d1h .111d it di,tmhed mt·. I ,at clown _and
lool.t·d ,II it hing 1111 tht 1,d1l1· an,1 \HllHltrcd whhcr
to n·ad it or 11111 1 w.,,. of com,e. ,Ill ,llta&lt;l on m,·
ft ct·dom: of t h.11 I lt.1d 110 dou ht. ',omeom· w .mted to
tn .rnd &lt;,top mt·. IH !.!_rmlttl mt· 111, flight. w.mted me to
au&lt;"pt 111, c;orrow ,md 1,1,1&lt;· it to the fua "ithou..t hcin
!ipan·cl .m, twinge. ,t.1b or ,;pa,;m of pain.
Why the tcleRram auscd nu..so much anxil'l, I do
not know. I sat bv tlac.· 1ahle fori Jong-tim&lt;' and diJ not
dare 10 open it, feeling that it «-oncc,11&lt;.-d somc power that
would draw me bad. and compd me to bc.ir the unh&lt;-ar
able from whith I wanud I&lt; t....r .1pt.·. Whcn I finally did
open it. ID h,md i-hooL. I wuld unh clt·dphtr the
telegram slo"h a!I it I wta· tr,1ml.11i11g tht conttnh from
:111 unfamiliar fordgn l.11111.,t·. II u·.id: "latfwr ,hing.
    </p>
    <p>
     Ple.i,e l·ome JI omt· . .Mo1hc1."
I gr,uiu.1l h rcali,t·d \\ h,ll it llll',1111  Onh H'-.lc·rd,l\ I  h.iel 1hough1 ahou1 rm p.11t·111, ancl u·1,u:1u·II 1h,1t I
hould h.ne to giw thc·m ,,.1111, .and \t"I it ff,ul onh becn
a -.uptrfl&lt; i.11 con,ich r .11io11 :\o\\ 1 he·, nt·,uc·d oh,1,1dc.i.,
dr.iggcd mt· h,1cL. .md m.uk e l.1i111-, upon,mc·. I immt·cli­
aleh rhought ot 1hc tomcr,.11iu11, I h.id h.icl \\ith m,
father at C:hri,1111.1,. 'Yc11111g pt·oplc·. lw h.ul ,.iid, with
their cgoti-.m ,nul ft-din of indc·pe·mh·ru e·. , .111 he
brt..:..,ht to tht point of l'ruling lhc i1 liH·, on ,1uou111 of
an uufulhllt·d "i,h. hut \,hc·n one\ hll-h hnuncf up \\llh
thmc of other-,, one.· dm·, 1101 &lt; 011,ade·r um·\ '"' n de -,iu·,
to the amc l'Xtl'nt \nd 1 "·'' .11 .. n tit·cl h, ,m h .1 l10nd 1
.M,r,,fathcr \\,l'I chin !\h mollw1 \\,l'I ,1lorw \\llh tum
and callcrl me. The· 1ho11ht of hi, lhing .11HI fwr lll'l"cl
r,,r me did nor ,It tht· IIIOllll"lll .1fle0Ll Ill' ',I tll"q&gt;h I
thought I L.nc\\ of &lt;'\en u,11u Arid,. hu1 I lulh u,,li"l·d
that I could 1101 no\\ ght lhtm .an t"\.11,l lnnclc-11 IO he,tr,
ignore: m ', mother ·., n·c l m·.,. ,md r u n ., " ,l\ from I hc·m
1.t the c,cning, I \\.1, at the r.ailw,1, 1r,11inn nath for
my jourmv, and .iutomall&lt; .ilh H:t &lt; omdou,h &lt;lid wh,1t
    </p>
    <p>
     wa1 necear. I obtained 111, tid.et. put the-, h.i11ge in
my poclet, went on to thl' platform .mcl enttred the·
trail,. I sat in a cor1wr of J ,nrnp.irtment, prepared for a
128
long night journey. A young man entered the compart
ment, looked around. gr#eted me and sat down opposite
me. He asked me somefhing, but I jmt looked at him,
only wishing that he would leave me alone. He coughed
and stood up, picked up hi-, yellow leather travelling
bag and looked for ano1hrr seat.
The train travelJed through the night in bt"nd, 1enseles,
haste, as if something wa1 going to be mi'lsed, or saved.
Some houn later wl1en I put UJ hdnd in my pocket, I felt
the letter. That i-. o,till there, I thought, and I opened it.
My puh!i'lhcr h;d writtm to me about concerts and
fees, and ht' i.efornwd me that m\ ,tffairo, were going wrll
and improving A well-known critic had written .1bout
me and he COUif:llulated me on 1t. Enc.losed with the
letter wa'I a newspaper-cutting, an article with mv name
1, ,11.: lwading. and a long di'1cou't11e on the po!ition of
    </p>
    <p>
     present ,, , · mmi&lt; and oE \\'agn&lt;'r and Brahms; then
thote wa, a rc\'icw of mv strim mmic. 'lnd songs, h
high praio;e ,md ood wi-,he'l .. \r, I rt'ad the 'lmall black
letter,, g .. tdualh realio,ed th,n it was about me, that
the wo11d and fame were holding out thdr hand, to me
For a moment I had to laugh.
fh&lt;' l&lt;'tter and the articlt' had loosened the bandage
from nt eH''i, and unexpec tedh I looked back into the
world and 'law that I \\d'I nm bt'aten and finished, but
that I wa, in the middle of it and belonged to it. I had
to go on lhing as \H·II ,,., I lould \\ .l'I it po,o;iblc? T9en
C\-er thing et bout the pc1,t h, r da\S &lt;.,une b.icl to me
and all that I had klt a if in a 1;tupor, and from which
I had hoped to e'ICapc-it wa'I all horrible, bitter and
humiliating. It \\-as all .i death-sentence. I h not
executed it, and I mu1;t lea,·e my task undone.
E
I heard the train rattling alon,. I opened the.window,
and aa we flew past I saw the gl,'IIDy stretches of country,
dismal-looking bare trees witli black branches, large
    </p>
    <p>
     farm-houses and distant hills . They all seemed unwilling
to exist, to express sorrow and resentment. Some people
might think all this was beautiful, but to me it only
seemed sad.,.J recalled the song: "ls that God's will?"
However muc.h I tried to look at the trees and fields
and roofs outside, however earnestly I tried to concentrate
my thoughti. on remote subjects and on anything I cou.t.d
think of without distrs, I was unable to do so for long.
I could not even think about my father; M had ecome
remo::e with the trees and the countryside at night, and
against my will and despite my effort.,, my thoughts
drifted ba&lt;.k to forbidden things. I saw a garden with
old trees in it, and ·,inongst them was a house with
palm-trees at the entrance, and inside on all the walls
th. were old, dark pain tin. I went in and walked
up the stain pa!it all the old pictures and no-one i.aw me.
I walked through like a ghost. There was a slim lady
there with dark hair, who turned her back on me. I saw
_him too, and they embraced. I i.aw my friend Heinrich
Muoth smile sadly and dejectedl, a'.I he did metimes, ·
    </p>
    <p>
     a! if he already knew that he would abui.e and ill-treat
this fair lady too, and that there was nothing that could
be done about it. It was stupid and senseless that this
un\lappy man, this reprobate, should attract the most
charming women, and that all my love and good inten­
tions should be in vain.
Awakening from a sleep or do1e, I saw the grey of morn­
ing aivl a pale light in the sky through the window. I
stretched out mv stiff limbs and felt sad and sober; the
1so
course that lay before le seemed gloomy and vexatious.
First of all I now had t: think. of my father and mother.
IJ was still grey and e ly morning when we approached
the bridges and houses Qf. my home-town. In the smell
and noise of the railway-station I felt so weary and exas­
perated that I did not want to leave the train. However,
I picked up my luggage and climbed int'l the nearest
cab, which first travelled over smooth asphalt, then over
slightly frosty ground, then crunched along a rough
ll'ack and stopped at the large gate of our house, which
    </p>
    <p>
     I had never seen closed.
But now i\ was closed and when, dismayed and fright,
ened, I pulled the bell, no-one came and there uas no
response. I l&lt;&gt;aked up at the house and felt as if I was
having an unpleasant wild dream. The driver looked on
in surprise and waited. 1-·eeling wretched, I went to the
other door which was only seldom used and which I had
not, gone through for ,·ears. This was open. 'Wt,n I
went in, I found my father's o!fic staff sitting there
wearing gr1y coat'i as usual, and they were quiet and
subduea.. They rose at my entrance for I was my father's
heir. Klemm, the book-keeper, who did not look 1nv
diffcrl'nt than he-had done twenty Cars' previously,
gave a short bow and looked at me enquiringly with a
sad expression on his face.
"Why is the front door locked?" I asked.
'"There is no-one there."
"Where is my father?" .
"In hospital. Your mother is also there."
"ls he still alive?"
    </p>
    <p>
     "He was still alive this morning, but they thb .
"Tell me what has happened."
131
"Oh, of course, you don't knflw I It is still his fool
We all say he had wrong treat::\:nt for it. Suddenly he
had severe pains and screamed terribly. Then he was
taken to hospital. Now he ,is suffering from blood­
poisoning. Yesterday, at half-past two we sent you a
telegram."
"I see. Thnk you. Could OU please have a sandwich
and a glass of wine brought to me quickly and order a
cab for me."
My wishes were whispered to 110meone and then theli.e
was silence again. Somt"one gave me a plate and a glass.
I ate a sandwich, drank a glas11 of wine, wrnt out and
climboo. into a cab; a horse snorted, and soon we .stood
at the hospital gate. Nurses with white .. caps on their
heads, and attendant!» wearing blue-striped linen suits
passed along the corridors. Someone took me by the
hand and led me into a room. Looking around I saw
    </p>
    <p>
     my IJ'-:&gt;ther nod to me with tears in her eCS, and in a
low, iron bed lay my father, changed and shrunken, hi
short grey beard ·standing out oddly.
He was still alive. He opened h1'1 e,es and rec.ognised
me despite his fever.
1'Still comP,Osing music?" he asked quietly, and his
voice and glance were kind as well as mocking. He gave
me a wink which expressed a tired, ironic wisdom that
had nothing more to impart, and I felt that he looked
int&lt;? my heart and 11aw and knew e\crything.
"Father," I said, but he only smiled, glanced at me
again half-mockingly, though alread with a somewhat
distracted look, and dosed his eyes again.
"Yo11 look terrible I" said my mother, putting her
arm around me. "Was it such a shock?"
132
I could not say anyt!Jing. Just then a young doctor
came in, followed by ari older one. The dying man was
given morphia, and tht! clever eyes that had looked so
undentanding and omniscient a moment ago did not
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter six
    </head>
    <p>
     open again. We sat beside him and watched him lying
there; we saw his face C'hange and become peaceful, and
we waited for the end. He still lived for everal houn
and died late in the afternoon. I could feel nothing
but a dull sorrow and extreme weariness. I sat with
tear-strained eyes and towards evening fell asleep i.itting
by the de;tth-bed.





That life is difficult, I have often bittM"ly realised. I
now had furthet uuse for serious reftection. Right up
to the present I have never lost th«i feeling of contft
diction that lies behind all lnowledge. My lif.e has been
miserable and difficult, and yet to others ao.1d sometimes
to m,self, it has seemed rich and wonderful. Man's life
seems to me like a long, weary night,that would be
intolerable if there were not occasionally flashes of light,
    </p>
    <p>
     the sudden brightnesf of which is so comforting and
wonderful, that the moments of their appearance cancel
out t..'nd justify the years of darkness.
The gloom, the comfortless darkness, lies in the inevi
table course of our daily lives. Why does one repeatedly
rise in the morning. eat, drink, and go to bed again?
Tbr rliild, the savage, the healthy young person does
not suffer as. a result of this qcle of repeated activities ..
If a man does not think too much, he rejoices at rising
id the morning, and at eating and drinking. He finds
satisfaction in them and does not want them to be
othnwise. But if he ceases to take things for granted,
he seeks eagerly and hopefully during the course of the
day for moments of real life, the radiance of which make1
him rejoice and obliterates the awareness of time and
all thc.r1ghts on the meaning and purpose of everything.
One can call these moments creative, because they seem
154
to give a feeling of unipn with the aeator, and whilt&gt;
they last, one is aensib\ of everything being necessary,
    </p>
    <p>
     even what is seemingly fortuitous. It is what the mystics
call union with God. Perhaps it is the excessive radiance
of these moments that makes evaything else appear so
dark, perhaps it is the feeling of liberation, the enchant­
ing lightness and the suspended bliss that r 1ake the rest
of life seem so difficult, demanding and oppressive. I do
not know. I have not travelled very far in thought and
pllilosophy.
However I do know that if there if, a state of bliss and  a paradise, ia must be an uninterrupted sequence of
such moments, and if this !!ttate nf bliss can be attlined
through sufferiag and dwelling in pain, then no sorrow
or pain can be so great that one should attempt to
escapt&gt; from it .
\ !LW day,s after my father's funeral-I wa,s still in a
state of i., 1vilderment and mental exhaustion-I r"und
myself during an aimless walk in a r.uburban street.
The small. attractive houses awaltened vague memories
in me 1, nkh I dwelt on until I recognised the house
and garden of my old teacher, who had tried JO rrawrt
me to the faith of the theosophists some Cars ago. I
    </p>
    <p>
     knC.ked at the door and he appeared, recognised me and
led me in a friendly manner into his room, where th·
pleasant smell of tobacco-smoke hovered around his
books and plants .
.. How are you?" asked Mr. Lohe. "Oh, of course, 'OU
have just lost your father. You look wretched. Has it
affected you 110 deeply?"
-.. No," I said, "my father's death would have vfected
me more deeply if I had still been on cool terms with
135
him, but during my last visit ll drew closer to him and
rid myself of the painful fecliDB of guilt that one has
towards good parents from wl!om one receives more
lo,e than one can give.
"I am glad about that."
:How are you going on with your theo1tophy? I should
like you to tlllk to me, bt.-c.ause I am unhappy."
.. what is wrong;"
""'Everything I &lt;.an't hve ,md I can't die. Eventhing
seenu. meamngle1t1t and stupid"
    </p>
    <p>
     Mr. Lobe puckered up hii. Lind, peaceful l09kmg lace.
I mu111t conf0&amp; that e,en h111 J..ind, r.ithcr pk.mp face h.ad
out lfle in a b.id humour, c1.nd I did not cxpec.t to obtain
any kmd of c.omfort from him and his 1v11tdom I only
wanted to hear him tall.., to prove his wiom of no avail
and to annoy him be&lt;!ause of hi happy state and opti­
mistic beliefs. I was not feeling friendly di,posed towards
him dr anyone else.
But the man wa-, not a1t self 1.itisfied and c1.bsorhed in
his doctrine&amp; as I had thought. He loolcd at me with
real concern and ,.idly shool hi, fair head
;vo,1. .ire ill. my dear fellow," he 11a1d h1mlv Perhaps
it is only ph"&amp;ic.al and 1f ,o, l'OU can 110011 find ,t rernt"dy
You must then go into the countr, worJ.. h.ird and not
e.tt any meat. But I don't think it i. that You arc
mentally 111icl "
"Po you think 50;&gt;"
"Yes. You are 11ufl'ering from a 1c.l..ne1111 that is unfor­
tunately common and that one c.mes acro1111 every dav
amongst sensitive people. It is related to morc1.l insanity
    </p>
    <p>
     and can also be called individuali1tm or im.aginarv lone.,.
liness. Modern books are full of it It has in11inu.ited
156
itself into your imaginftion; you are isolated; no ont:
troubles about you an no-one understands you. Am
I right?"
"Almost," I admitted with surprise.
"Listen. Those who suffer from this illness only need
a couple of disappointments to make the1r believe that
there is no link between them and othC"' people, that
all people go about in a state of complete loneliness,
th.t.t they never really understand each other, share any­
l.1'ing or have anytlting in common. It also happens that
people wi,o suffer from this sickness become arrogant
and regard aX other healthy pt&gt;ople who can understand
and love each other as flock&amp; of sheep. If this si&amp;n
were general, .&amp;le human race would die out, but it is
only found amongst the upper classes in Central Europe.
It can be curc-d in \'oung peopJeand it is, indeed, part
o! ah .. invitable period of development."
    </p>
    <p>
     His ironi professor's tone of voice annoyed me a .. ittle.
As he did not sec me smile or look as if I wa.s going to
defend mvsclf. the kind. concei·ned e'x.prc'l-.ion returned
to his f.. t ..
"Forgive me," he saiJ kindl, "mu arc suff,riw:.c:- f:'lm
the sickness itself, not the popular carkamre of it. But
there really is a c·ure for it. It is pure fiction that there
is no bridge between one person and another, that
everyone goes about lonely and misund&lt;.Tstood. On the
contrary, what people ha,·e in common with each olh.er
is much more and of greater importance than what each
person has in his own nature and "hkh makes him
different from others."
· "That is possible," I said, "but what ftOod d&lt;&gt;JI it do
me to know all this? I am not a philosopher and I am
137
not unhappy because I cannot 16.nd truth. I only want
to live a lJttle more easily and contentedly." ·
,.Well, just try I There is ncl need for you to study
any books or theories. But an long as you are ill, you
    </p>
    <p>
     must believe in a doctor. Will you do that?"
:1 will try."
,.Good I U-:vou were physically ill and a doctor advised
you to take baths or drink medicine or go to the seaside,
you might not understand why this or that remedy
should hdp, hut you would try it aqd obey his instntc­
tions. Now do the same with what I advise yoy. Learn to
think more about others than about yoursdf for a time.
Jt is \he only way for you to get better." ·
"flow can I do that? Evt&gt;ryone thinb about himself
first."
"You must overcomtthat. You must cultivate a certain
indifference towards your own well-being. Learn to
thi: what can I do? There is only one expedient.
You must learn to love someone so much, that his or
her well-being is more important than your own. I don't
mean that you should fall in love! That would give
th .. qros.ite result!"
"I understand, but with whom shall I try it?"
"Begin with someone close to you, a friend or a relation.
    </p>
    <p>
     There is your mother. She has had a great lo'ls; she is
now alone and needs i,omcone to comfort her. Look after
her. and try to be of some help to her."
· "My mother and I don't understand each other very
well. It will be difficult."
"If your good intentions stop short, it will indeed be
diflicula. It's the old story of not being understood!
You don't always want to be thinking that tfiis or that
1ss
person does not fully urtd,erstand you and is perhaps not
quite fair to you. Try yourself to understand other
people, try to please thhn and be just to them! You do
that and begin with youi mother! Look, you must say
to yourself: Life does' not give me much pleasure in
any case, so why shouldn't I try this! .,.You have lost
interest in your own life so don't give it much thought.
Give yourself a task, inconvenience yourself a little."
"I will try. You are right. It is all the same to me
whatever I do. Why shouldn't I do what you advise me."
What impressed me about his remarks-was the similar­
    </p>
    <p>
     ity betwe;n ihem and the views on life that my father
had expounded at our last ineeting: Live for ofh
Don't take Yiursclf '° seriously! This outlook was
quite at variance with my feelings. It also had.a flavour
of the catechism and mnfirmaon instruction which,
Fi..t· , very healthy young person. I thought of with
aversion and dislike. But ir was really not a quesfton of
opinions and a philo.phy of life but a practial attempt
to make my unhappy life tolfiable. ·J would try it.
I looL. ,I with surprise at this man whom I had never
really taken seriously and whom I was now J&gt;f'':'1.,''ing
to act as my adviser and doctor. But he really seemed
to .show towards me some of that lo,,e which he recom­
mended. He seemed to share my suffering and sincerely
wished me well. In any case, I felt that I had to take
some drastic measure to continue living and breat9ing
like other people. I had thought of a long period of
solitude among the mountains or of losing msclf in
bard work, but instead I would obey my friendly advise?
as I had no more faith in my experience and wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
     When I told my mother that I did not intend to leave
139
her by henelf and hoped she tyould tum to me and
share her life with me, she shook her head sadly.
"Whal are you thinking of!" lhe protested gently, "it
would not be so easy. I havf', my own way of life and
could not make a fresh start. In any case, you ought to
be _free and no burdened with me."
"We could fry it," I said, "it may be more successful
than you think."
At the beginning I had enough to do to prevent me
from brooding and giving way to despjlir. There was the
house and an extensive business, with a&amp;betll in our favour  and bills to be paid; there were bool, .tnd accounti.,
monc.9j loaned and money received, and it was a problem
to know what was to become of all these,thing,. At the
beginning I naturally wanted to sell everything, but that
could not be done 110 lj_uickly. My mother was attached
to the old house, m father's will had to be executed
and there were many difficulties. It was necesary for
the book-keeper and a notary lo a,'list. The days and
    </p>
    <p>
     weeks passed liy with arrangements, correspondence
about monc and debts, and plans and di,appointment'I.
Soqp. C"npld not cope with all the account and official
forms. I engaged a solicitor to help the notary and left
them to disentangle ever'thing.
My mother frequently diappointed me although I
tried to mak.e thing ar, easy as po,'iible for her during
thi,.period. I relieved her of all bu,ine11s matters, I read
to her and took her for drive,. Sometimes I felt an urge
to tear MSClf away and leave evcpthing, but a sense of
shame and a certain curio,ity as to how it would turn out
prevemed me from doing so.
My mother thought of nothing but the deceased, and
14.0
ahowed her grief in ll'lall feminine acts which seemNi
strange and often trivial to me. At the beginning I had
to sit in ·my father's piace at table; then she considered
it unfitting and the plac;e had to remain empty. Some­
times I could not talk i:o her enough about my father: at
other times she became quiet and look.t me sadly as
    </p>
    <p>
     soon as I mentioned his name. Most of all I missed my
music. At times I would have given much to be able to
play my violin for an hour, but only after many weeks
thad passed did I venture to rlo 'io and even then she sighed
and seem.ed offended. he appcart&gt;d to be little interested
in my effortr.to draw clo'ier to her and win her friend'thip.
This often made me suffer and made me want  give­
up my attem11ts, but I continued to perse\'ere and grew
accustomed to the succession of cheerless days, My own
life lay broken and dead. Onlf occasionall did I hear
d. dun erho of the past when I heard Gertrude's voice in a
dream, "1 when melodies from my opera sudden'ty came
batk to me during a quiet hour. When I made a journey
to R. to ,-ive up my rooms th\!re· and to c.ollect my
p&lt;&gt;SSCS6t ns, ever&gt; thing connected with the place seemed
extremely remote. I only visited Teiser, whoJt!:lrl. Lv-,.n so
loyal to me. I did not venture to enquire about Gertrude .
. J gradually began to fight a 'ic."Cl"et battle against my
mother's reserved and re11igned beha\'iour, which for a
long time distressed me exrremel·· I often asked her to
    </p>
    <p>
     tell me what she would like and whethc.'1" I displeasel her
in any way. She would then ,;troke my hand and with a
sad smile would say: "Don"t \\orn, Ill c-hild. I am just
an old woman." I then ban to male imestigations else­
where and did not disdain to make enquiries 'irom the
book-keeper and the sernnta.
141
I then discovered many thinaa. The chief one WI
this: my mother had one close relation and friend in the
town; she was an unmanied cousirj She did not go about
a .-eat deal but she was very friendly with my mother.
My father had not liked this Miss Schniebel, and she had
a re.al dislike  me so she had not been to our house
recently. My mother had once promised Miss Schniebel
she could com and live with her if she outlived my
father, and this hope appeared to have been shattered by
my presence. When I gradually learneq all this, I visited­
the old lady and tried to make myself as agrable as
possible to hc.r. Being involved in eccentricities and little
ittrigses was new to me and caused me some amusement.
    </p>
    <p>
     I managed to persuade the lady to c.ome .. to our house
again, and I perceived that mv mother was grateful to
me for this. To be ,ure, they now both tried to dissuade
me from selling the house, as I had wished, and they were
successful in doing so. Then the lady trfod to usurp
my place in the house and obtain the long-desired plc e
of my father, from which I barred her with ID presence.
There wa, room for both of us, but she did not want a
masta in .. !he house and rcfu to come and live with
us. On the other hand, she visited us frequently, made
herself indispensable as a friend in many 11mall things,
treated me diplomatically as an important personage,
and acquired the position of an adviser in the household,
whiqi I could not conte1t with her.
My poor mother did not take either her part or mine.
She was weary and suffered a great deal as a result of
the change in her life. Only gradually did I realise how
much s missed my father. On one occasion, on going
into a room in which I did not expect to see her, I
141
    </p>
    <p>
     found her occupied at 'I wardrobe. It startled her when
I came in, and I went out quickly. I had noticed,
however, that she had peen handling my father's clothes,
and when I saw her latei;, her eyes were red.
In the summer a new battle commenced. I wanted to
go away with my mother. We both ne?ft'ed a holiday,
and I also hoped it would cheer her up and draw her
closer to me. She showed little intcresL at the thought
of travelling, but raised no objection. On the other
.hand, Miss Schnit"bel was very much in favour of my
mother remaining and my going alone, but I had no
intentiod of giving way in this matter. I expected to gain
a great deal from this holiday. I was beginning "° feel
ill at ease in the old houc with my rco,tless, sorro\fl"ul  mother. I hoped to be of more help to her away from
the place, and al'lo hoped to C'introl mv own thoughts
·:.ul .noods better.
So I a, a angc.-d that we hould &amp;Cl off on our ;oumey
at the end of June. We moved on dar b da; we visited
Constance and 7iirich and travdll&lt;f over the 13rilnig Pass
to the. scmese Oberland. My mother remained quiet
    </p>
    <p>
     and listless, bore patiently with the journey an4 looked
unhappy. At lnterlakcn she ,omplained thft she could
nQt sleep, but I persuaded her to romc on to Grindelwald,
where I hoped we houd both feel at peace. During
this long. senselc'ls, jo leo,s 1ourne, I realiiied the impos­
sibility of running awa· and eS&lt;.aping from ID .own
misery. \Ve saw beautiful green Jakes reflecting magni­
ficent old towns, we saw mountaim whirh appeared blue
and white, and bluish-green glac iero, glistening in the
sunlight, but we viewed even thing unmo\'ed and.without
pleasure. We felt ashamed, but we were only depressed
14
and weary of everything. We went for walks, looked up
at the mountains, breathed the pure, sweet air, heard
the cow-bells ringing in the m9adows, and we said:
.. _Isn't it lovely I " but dared not look each other in the
face.
We endurit for a week at Grindelwald. Then one
morning my mither said: "It is no me; let us go bacik.
I 'should like f... be able to sleep again at night. If I
    </p>
    <p>
     become ill and die, I want to be at home."
So I quiteh pac.ked our trunks, 11,ilently agreeing
with her, and we travelled back quilker than we had
come. But I felt as if I were not going, back home,
but tQ a prison, and my mother al11,o dhplaved little
sl'1.isfac.tion.
On the evening of our return home, I 11:iid to her:
"How would you feel i' I now went off alone? I should
like to go to R. I would willingly remain with OU if it
served ..:iny purp011e, but we both feel ill and mi'&gt;l'rable
and onl have a bad effect on ea&lt;.h other. A.,k your
friend to come and live with OU. She can comfort you
better than I."
She tool mv hand and '&gt;troled it gcnth ,ls was her
wonc nodded .in&lt;l smiled at me, and her 11,mile dis­
tinctly '&gt;.lid: "Yei., go b all mcan11,'"
Despite all my effort11, and gc,od mtl'nt101111,, the onlv
results were that we had harassed each othe1 for a c.ouple
of months and she was more estranged from me than
ever. Although we had lived together, each of us had
    </p>
    <p>
     borne his own burden, not '&gt;haring it with the other, and
had sunk deeper into hi., own grief and sid.ne'&gt;'&gt;. Mv
attemp'il had been in vain and the best thing for me to
do was to go and leave the wa open for Miss Schnicbel.
144
I did this without delay, and, I did not know where
else to go, I went back to R. On my departure it occurred
to me that I no longer /,!ad a home. The town in which
I was born, in which I.had spent my youth and had
buried my father, did 'not matter to me '1Y more. It
had no more ties for me and had nothi&gt;Ag to give me
b11t memories. I did not tell Mr. Lone on taking my
leave from him, but his advice had not .uelped.
By chance, my old rooms in R. were still va&lt;.ant. It
.eemed like a sign to me that it is u"icless to try to break
off associatiom, with the pai,t and ei,capc from one's
destiny. 1 again lived in the i.ame hou"ie and rooms in
the same town. I unpacked Dl violin anc.l my wori,, and
found evertbJng as it had been except that Muoth ffll.d
gone to Munich, and he and Gertrude were engaged to
    </p>
    <p>
     be married.
I pd &lt;&gt;d up the part!t of my opera as if they were the
ruins of 111 prev1om. life from whilh I 11till wichcd to
try' lo build 110111ething, but the music returned very
slowly to mv benumbed 1,oul and-only really"hurst forth
when t.: ,. writer of all my texti, i,em me the words for a
new song. It arrhcd .1.l a time when the old restlessness
freqm·ntly ,returned to me, and with a feelffig' '&gt; shame
aRd a thoui,and misgivin,-,s, I m.t d to walk round the
lmthori,' g-.1rden. Tht· word it of the 1,011g were:
The south wind roari. at night,
Curlews hastm in their flight,
The air ii. damp and warm.
Desire to sleep has vani,hed now.
Spring has arri\"cd in the night
In the wake of the storm.
145
I, too, at night no longer sleep,
My heart feels young and strong.
Memory takes me by yie hand to peep
    </p>
    <p>
     Again at daya of joy and aong.
But frightened at so bold a deed
loes not linger long.
Be still, my heart, away with pain I
Though p.t'lllion stin again
In blood that now Bows lowly
And leads to paths once known,
These paths vou tread in vain
For youth has Bown.
n, verses afl:ected me deeply and re-awakened life
and music in me. Re-opened and smarting St"vcrely, the
long concealed wound 1vai. t.on'\crted into rhthms and
sounds. I compo11ed the music to this song, and then
picked,up the loo,t thread'! of my opera, and after my long
spell of inaction I agam plunged deepl into the swift
creative current 11rith fevensh intoxkatton until I finc11lv
emerged to the free heights of feeling, where pain and
bliss are no longer separate from eac.h other and all
passiod"?irh strength in the soul pre'IS upwards in one
steady Bame
    </p>
    <p>
     On the day th.it I l\rote m new M&gt;ng and i,howed it to
Teiser, I walked home in the evening past an avenue of
chestnut-treei., with a feeling of renewed strength for
wor The p.io,t month'i sull gazed at me a'l if through
masked eyes, and appeared emptv and without comfort,
but my heart now beat more qu1c"k.ly and I 110 longer
conceived wh I should want to escape from my sorrow.
Gertru's image arose clearly and splendidly from the
146
dust. I looked into her bright eyes without fear and left
my heart unprotected to receive fresh pain. It was better ·
to suffer because of her and to thrust the thorn deeper
into the wound than to l_ive far away from her and flit
about in a ghost-like manner remote from IJlY real life.
Between the dark, heavily-laden tree-tops 'it the spread­
ing chestnut-trees could be seen the dark blue of the sky,
full of stars, all solemn and golden, whid. extended their
radiance unconcernedly into the distance. That was
me nature of rhe stars. And the trees bore their buds
and blossoms and scars for everyone to 'lee, and whether
    </p>
    <p>
     it signifie:J nJeasure or pain, they accepted the strong
wil to live. The Oies that lived for a day whirl'¥1 on
towards death,. Every life had its radiance and beatff'y.
I had insight to it all for a moment, understood it and
found it good, and also found m, life and sorrows good.
1 1iuis!1ed my opera in the autumn. During this time
I met Mr. Imthor at a concert. He greeted me warmly
and' was rather surprised that I had not let him know
that I wao; in town. He had heard that my father had
died an.., that since then 1 had been living at home.
"How is Mi11s Gertrude?'" I asked as calmly as possible.
"Oh, you mur,t come and sec for Ourself. he is going
to,be married in November, and we are c.ounting on you
to be there."
"Thank you, Mr. lmthor. And how is Muoth?"
"He is well. You know, I am not too happy about. the
marriage. I have Jong wanted to ask you about Mr.
Muoth. As far as I know him, I have no complaints to
make, but I have heard so many things about him. His
name is mentioned in connection with different ;women.
    </p>
    <p>
     Can you tell me anything about it?"
147
'"No, Mr. lmthor. It would serve no purpose. Your
daughter would hardly change her mind because of
rumoun. Mr. Muoth is my friepd and I wish him well
if he finds happiness."
.. Very wl. Will you be coming to hCC u11, soon?"
.. I think in. Goodbye, Mr. Imthor."
It was not long ago that I had tried to avoid all
d&gt;nnection witk. both of them, not bcc:-au11,C of envy or in
the hope that Gertrude would still be drawn toward
me, but because I wais convinced .md felt in advanC\!
that things would not go well with them, because I Wcl\
aware of Muoth's o,elf-tormenting melan&lt;.hyly 'and ex&lt;.it
abilis_v and of Gertrude's en11,ithene'IS, and becau
M'arian and Lottie were ,till so vi\ld i" my memory.
Now I thought differentl. The battering of my
whole life, half a ear f inner lonelines, and the know­
ledge of leaving my OUth behind me had changed me.
I was ROW of the opinion that it wa11 foolish and danger­
    </p>
    <p>
     ous to stretch out one's hand to alter other people'11,
destinies. I also had no reason to think that Ill
hand wo1s skilful or that I could regard my.elf ol\ one
who could help and understand other people, after mv
attempts-rn. this direction had failed and dic,.our.1gcd
me Even now I strongly doubt the abilitv of people to
al and shape their own live a.nd those of other people
to any appreci.1ble extent One &lt;.an acquire money,
fame and distinction, but one cannot ueate happiness or
unh\ppinC11,\, not for oneself or for other'J. One &lt;.an onl
accept what come11,, although one can, to be \ure, accept
it in entirely different ways. As far a11 I was concerned,
I wouli make no more strenuous endeavours to try and
find a place in the sun, but would accept what was
148
allotted to me, try to make the best of it and, if possible,
turn it into some good.
Although life continue, independent of such reflections,
sincere thoughts and ri5C?lutiom leave the soul more at
peace and help one to bear the unalterc1.ble., At least, it
    </p>
    <p>
     subsequently appeared to me that -.incc I had become
resigned and indifferent toward, my pcnonal fate, life
had treated me more g&lt;"ntly.
That one -.oinetime-. unex.pect&lt;.dl achieve'! without
tffort what one has previom,ly hecn unc1.ble to attain,
de11pite all endcaour'i and good will, I 'IOOn learned
through my '°other. I wrote to her even month, but had
not heard from her for &lt;tome time. If there ha&lt;J. been
anything wro, I should hue learned about it, so I1id
not give her much thought and continued to write my
letters, brief notes as to how I 't'as lcepmg, in which I
o&amp;lW.t.!11 included kind regard., to Mis, Schniebel.
These greetings were recenth no longer ddhered.
Th'e two women had done a1, the whhed but it had not
produced the de&lt;,ircd rc,ulh Jmprmcd conditions had
inftatef.i Mm 'khniebcl''I ego Immediatelv after my
departure she trmmph,mth occupied the seat of conquest
and settled down in our house She no, sbai'ed the
hou,e with hl'I' old friend and cou'lin and, after long
year.. of want, regarded It ai, a well de'lened turn of luck
    </p>
    <p>
     to be able to rc-ign and gh·e her..elf air1, as one of the
mi'ltre!i'IC'I of a dignihed hou'lehold. he did not acuire
ex.pensive habit!i ur pro,e wa'lteful-11the had been in
straitened drc.um&lt;,t,uu.es ,md semi-povert too long for
her to do that. She neither wore more expensive clothes
nor slept between finer linen 'iheets. On the contrary,
she introduced i,ome worth-while economies wh:re there
149
was room for saving to be made-but she would noc
renounce authority and power. The two maids had to
obey her no leas than my mother, and she also dealt with
servants, workmen and postmen fa an imperious manner.
Gradually, "s deires are not killed by fulfilling them,
she also extended her dominion over things that my
mdther would not so readily concede. She wanted -to
know about m-motl1er'1J ,isitors, even if they were
personal, and did not like her to receive c1.nvone withour
her being there. She did not ju'Jt want to hear extract
from letters that were received, partiularly tho\C from
me, but wanted to read the letters hero;elf.. Finall, she
    </p>
    <p>
     fonnc;l the opinion that mc1.ny thmgs in my mother's
hoi...r:c were not done, looked after c1.nd conducted as she
thought the ought to be. Abo,e all, .he /onsidered that
the discipline with the.doml',tic ..enants was not strict
enough. If a maid went out m the evening, or talked
too long to the postman, or if the cook a'lked for a free
Sunday, she strongl repro, ed ID mother for her leniency
and delivered long lecture, to her on the correct way to
c.onduct a houisehold furthermore, it hurt her very
much to see how of ten her 1 uleis for economy were grotJSly
ignored.  much coal Wd.!1 ordered, and too many eggs
accounted for by the c.ook' She bitterly opposed things
of .that nature, and that \tas how di'JCord arose between
the friends.
Until then my mother had taken the line of least
resistance although she did not agree with everything,
and was in many ways di5appointed with her friend,
whose relationship towardis her 11he had imagined to be
different. Now, on the other hand, when old respected
customsin the house were in danger, when her every-day
    </p>
    <p>
     I ljO
comforts and the peace of the house were at stake, s
could not refrain from objecting and putting up soile
resistance, although she did not do 'IO immediately.
There were differences' oJ opinion and little arguments
in a friendly way, but when the c.ook gave notice-and
it was only with difficulty, after many promises and
almost apologies that my mother per .. uaded her to stay
-the question of authority in the hou .! bt"gan to lead
to a real battle.
Miss Sclmiehel. proud of her knowledge, experience,
thrift and organi'ling abilitie,;, c.ould not undentand why
all these ql\illitics were not apprcc.iated, and ,;he felt
justified in &lt;.ritici,;ing the previom hom,ehold ec.opomy,
in hnding fauJt with ID mother's hou'ie-keey;Rg' azllf in
showing ber disdain for the cu..tom., and traditions of
the house. Then my mother me11tioned m, father under
whoe ,nanagemcnt e\-erything in the hou'iC had gone so
well fo1 man Cars. He had not tolerated triialities
anil petty economic.,; he had gi\en the .. enants freedom
    </p>
    <p>
     and privilre,;; he h.id h.ited dhpUt&lt;''&gt; with the maid'!
and inddent!t of a disagreeable nature. But when m
mother mentioned my father, whom &lt;;he had previously
criticised occ.isionallv, but who. 'oinc.c hi1' de.irti, had
become hol to her, Mi.,., 'i&lt;hnichel wuld no longer
contain her .. elf and reminded m, mother pointedly how
he had long ago cxprc.,.,ed he1 opmion about the
deceased and thought it \\ ,l'&gt; now hih time to abandon
the old w.iy,; and let rea&lt;,on 1cign. Out of considertion
to her friend, he had not wanted to .. poil her memory
of the decca,;ed, but no\\ that '&gt;he had mentioned him,
she had to confess that man\ thing .. v.hich were_un,;atis­
factory in the hou..e were due to the old master, and she
I Ii l
did not see why now that she was free, things should
continue in the same way.
That was like a blow to my mother for which she
uld never forgive her cousin. \.Previously it had been
a need an a pleasure to grumble now and then to her
confidential friend and to find fault with the master of
    </p>
    <p>
     the house, but now she would not suffer the slightest
rBection to be.:a&amp;t upon his sacred memory. She began
to feel that the incipient revolution in the house was
not only disturbing, but above all ,a sin against tht
deceased.
This state of affairs continued without mv knowledge.
Whe1, for the first time, m mother mentioned this lack
of11Ud:iy in a letter, even thou11,h &amp;he qid so carefully
and discreetly, it made me laugh. In Dl next letter I
omitted greetin,ri to the &amp;pm\tcr, but did not refer to
1ny mother's allusion,;. I thought that the women would
settle l'he affair better without me. Be&amp;ides, there was
another matter which was oa.uping m, mind much
more.
October had arrived and the thought of Gertrude's
forthcominf marriage wa'&gt; c.on&amp;tantly on my mind. I had
not been to l'lcr house again and had not '&gt;CCn her rither.
After the wedding, when &amp;he would be .iwa, I thought
of-making c.ontac.t with her father again. I also hoped
that in time a good, friendl relation,;hip would be
    </p>
    <p>
     estahli&amp;hed between Gertrude and I. We had been too
I. dose to each other to be able to cancel out the past so
easily, but I did not yet have the c.ourage for a meeting
which, knowing her, &amp;he would not have tried to avoid.
One ay, someone knocked at my door in a familier
way. Full of misgivings, I jumped up and opened it.
15.1
Heinrich Muoth stood there and held out his band to me.
"Muoth I" I aied, and gripped his hand tightly, but
I could not look into his eyes without everything coming
back to me and hurting me. I again aw the letter lying
on his table, the letter in Gertrude' hand-w..-iting, and
saw myself taking leave from her and wanting to die.
Now he stood there looking at me kccnh. He seemed
a little thinner but as hand.,,&gt;me c1.nd c1. p1oud as ever.
"I did not expect you," I said quif'tl.
"Didn"t OU? I know that you do not go to Gertrude\
houc any more. A., t.ir a, I am concerned-let U\ not
talk about it! I ha\.e come to 'Joee how l0U .ire and al'IO
how Our work i!!. pro,rre,!!.ing How i., the opera e:oin
    </p>
    <p>
     on?"
"It is finihed. But first of all, how i,; Gertrude?"
"Shf' i\ well. We are being-m;.11ricd oon."
'J J now.'"
"Well, c1.1cn't OU going to \i,it her ,;ome time ,AOOll?°'
"'Latt"r. I first \\,mt to \Cc.' i£ ,he got·, on well in lOUr
hands."
"llm ... "
"Heinrich. forghe me. hut ,;omctime., I cannot help
thinking about Lottie whom mu tre.ited ha and9beat."
,"Forget .1bout Lottie. It ,;en e&lt;l her right. No woman
is beaten if 11he doesn't want to be."
"Oh! About the opera, I don't rc.ilh J..now where I
should ,;ubmit it hnt It would hc1.,e to be .i good theatre,
although I don't J..now, of coUI!!.e, whether it wilt be
accepted."
"Oh, CS it will. I wanted to talk to ,ou about that.
Bring it to Munich. It will most likely be accepted there;
people are taking an intere,;t 10 OU. If necessary, I will
153
    </p>
    <p>
     stand as guarantor for you. I don't want anyone else to
.sing my part before I do.''
That was very helpful. I gladly agreed and·promised
to arrange for copies to be ma\le as soon as possible.
We disculJSGd details and continued to talk with some
embarrassment, as if it was a matter of life and death
to ·us, and yet we only wanted to pas11 the time and clese
obr eyes to therchasm which had appeared between us.
Muoth was the first to bridge the gap.
"Do you remember the fint time you took me to th,
Imthors?" he said. 1t is a year ago now.''
"I know," I said, .. you don't need to reinind me. It
woulaJ be better if you went now I "
1Q!'"t yet, my friend. So you still rerpember. Well,
if you were in love with the girl then, why didn't you
say: 'Leave her alone, \_.ea, e her for me! ' It would have
been enough. I should h.i,·e understood the hint.''
"I cc,.uldn't do that.''
.. You couldn't? Why not? 'Who told vou to look on
and say nothing· until it wa'l too late?"
    </p>
    <p>
     "I did not know whether 11hc cared for me or not. And
then-if she prefers you, I can't do anything about it."
"Yob are"'-.child ! She might have been happier with
you. Every man ha111 the right to woo a woman. 1£ ,ou
had only said a word to me at tbe beginning. if OU had
just given me a hint, I should ha,c kept away. After­
wards, it was naturally too late."
n1is conversation was painful to me.
"I think differently about it," I said, and you need
not worry. Now leave me in peace  Give her my regards
and I will come and visit you in Munich.''
.. WoA't you come to the wedding?"
154
'"No, Muoth, that would be in bad taste. But-are
you being married in church?"
"Yes, of course, at the minster."
"I am glad about that! have composed something for
the occasion, an organ piece. Don't worry, .it is quite
short." .
:vou are a good fellow! It's the ven· de,,·il that I
    </p>
    <p>
     should bring you so much bad I uck ! "
"I think OU should ,ay 'good luck', Muoth."
"Well, we i.han't quarrel. I mmt go now; there are  still thin to buy and goodnesi. know&lt;, what to do. You
will send the.opera 'SOOD, won't vou? Send it to me and
I will talc it to the right people 1mself. And befort the
wedding the two of u., mmt !ipend an c, ening.;,;gr·lrer.
Perhapit tomorrow! \'c&lt;,? Well. goodb,c."
So I was drawn into the old -.irde again and passed
LllC mght with thought and sorrow that had recurred
a hundrca timer,. I he folloin\ dav I ,i.,ited an organist
whbm I knew and aslcd him to play m music at Muoth's
wedding. In the afternoon I went through m,· overture
with Tctscr for the l,ut time, and in the e,ening I went
to the inn \\here Hemrich was staing.
I found a room prepared for u, with an tfflcn fife and
candles. Tht"re was a white doth on the table with
Rowers and ,iher-plate. Muoth wa alread, there waiting
for me.
"Now, my friend, this i'I a farewell celebration, more
for me than for OU. Gertrude &lt;,ends bet rards. T&amp;iay
    </p>
    <p>
     we i.hall drink to her health."
We filled our glasses and silenth emptied the contents.
"Now let us think onl about ourselves. Youth i
slipping away, m, .. dear friend, don't OU feel ft also?
155
It should be the best time of one's life. I hope that is
false, like 'all these well-known sayings. The belt should
still lie ahead, otherwise the whole of life isn't worth
.while. When your opera is proluced, we'll talk again."
We relQed and drank some heavy Rhine wine. After­
wards, we sank back into the easy chain with cigars and
champagne, and for an hour it reminded us bo1h of old
times when we..used to take pleasure in discussing plans
and chatting lightly. We looked at each other pensively
but frankly and felt happy to be in each other's compan,.
At times like these, Heinrich was kinder and more
gracious than usual. He knew how fleeting these
pleatures were and clung to them fondly a!!. long as his
mr..--4.aflrlured. Quietly, \\ith a smile, h1e talked to me
about Munich, told me little incident,; about the theatre,
    </p>
    <p>
     and practised his old WI of describing people and situa­
tions in a few concise word!!..
AftCII" he had sketched hi,; c.ondu&lt;lor, his future father­
in-law and others amusingly and clearly but without
malice, I drank io his health and said: "What about mf'?
Can you describe people of my type, too?"
"Oh, yes," he said calmly with a nod and gazed at me
with Ms dat..:. eyes. "'You are the artist tvpe in rvcry way.·
The artist is not, as ordinan- people 1hinl.., a jolly 'IOrt
of person who flings out works of art here and there out
of sheer exuberance, but unfortunateh he is muaJlv a
poor soul who is being suffocated with ,urplus ri&lt;hes
and therefore has to give some of them away. It is a
fallacy that ther are bappy artist,; .that i!!. just philistines"
talk. Light-hearted Mozart kept up his spirit,; with
champagne and was con!!,equently short of bread, and
why iteethoven did not commit !!,Uicide in his youth
156
instead of composing all that wonderful music, nCH&gt;ne
knows. A real artist has to be unhappy. Whenever he
    </p>
    <p>
     is hungry and opens his bag, there are only pearls inside
it."
"But if he desires a litne pleasure and waJ111lh and
sympathy in life, a dozen operas and trios and things like
that. don't help him much."
"I suppose not. An hour like thi'i with f glass of wine
and a friend. if he has one, and a pleasant chat about
tliis remarkable life is about the ber,t thing he can expect.
That's how it is. and we should be glad to have that at
least. Just9think how long it takes a poor devil to make
a good rocket: and the pleasure obtained from it hardly
lasts a minute! In the same way one has to e
joy and peace c!t mind and a good com,cience to enrich
a pleasant hour here and there. Go h&lt;'alth, m, friend!" : :,1 not at all agree with his philophy, but what
did it matl.rl I was glad to r,pend an evening Ji this
with· the friend I feared I was going to lme and \\ho wa'i
&lt;.-qually uncertain about me, and I me&lt;litated upon the
pa"lt whi. h r,Lill la, so clo'le to me, and ,et encircled my
youth with its carefree days which would return no more.
Eventually the evening came to an end end Ml1oth
    </p>
    <p>
     offered to walk home with me, but I told him not to
trouble. I knew that he did not like walking with me
outside; m' slow, halting walk irritated him and made
him bad-tempered. He did not like being inconvenienced
and little things like that are often the most annovdlg.
I was pleased with m little org.in-pi&lt;'ce. It was a kind
of prelude, and for me it was a detaduncnt from the
past, thanks and goods wishes to the betrothed couple
and an echo of happy times spent with both otthem.
15;
On the day of the wedding I went to the churcll in
good time. and concealed by the organ. looked down at
the ceremony. When the organist began to play my
music, Gertrude looked up alftl smiled at her &amp;and. I
had not ¥Cll her all this time and she looked even taller
and slimmer than ui-ual in her white dress. Gracefully.
with a serious expression on her face, she walked along
the narrow, acJ.orncd path to the altar by the side of the
proud-looking, erect man. It would not have made 1uch
a splendid picture if instead of him. I, a cripple with, a
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter seven
    </head>
    <p>
     crooked leg had w.tll.ed along this sdlemn path




It was already ordained that I 11hould not dwell for long
on my friends' wedding and that my reflections, desires
aad self-torture should not be directed along this channel.
I had given little thought to my mother during this
time. I knlw, indeed, from her la&lt;,t letter that the peace
and comfort of the house wa'i nN all that it might be,
but I had neither reason nor de11ire to interfcr ,nrlie
strife between tfte two ladie11 and .ic.c.epted it, just a little
maliciously, a'i one of thoc,e things in whkh my judgment
w- .. tumen-ssary. in&lt;.e then I h.t.d ritten to her without
receiving .111 repl, I had enough to do with the JYOVis­
ion -and c'\.amination of rnpie, of Ill op&lt;.Ta without
thinking about Mio,c, Schuicbel.
Tben . .l rclcivcci a letter from nl mother which sur­
prised me by its unmu.il hull alone. It w.t.11 a letter of
    </p>
    <p>
     distress complaining about her c.ompanion, whose l9ans­
grea.sions in the hou-.c .ind .igaimt m mothl'r·s peace of
mind I now learned .ihout in detail. She found it hard to
write to me about the matter and did so with dignity and
di11aetion. It was simpl  confession of the disillusion­
ment she had &amp;uffered in connection with her old frit!11d
and cou&amp;in.
My mother did not only now &lt;.0mplctely understand
why my late father and I disliked l\fic,s Sc.hniebel, but she
was now agreeable for the lmu&lt;JC to be M&gt;ld if ,: still
159
wished it, and to go and live somewhere else, if only Lo
escape from this Schniebel woman .
.. It might be a good thing for you to tome over.
Luc.ie, of course. alre.ady know, wh.1t I .im thinking and
planning-she is very 1,harp-but relation, are too
strained for me to be .able tn tell her what i necessary
j.n the best possible ,u, he ignores my hints that I
would prefer to be alone in the houiie ag.1in ,md that I
could manage without her, .1nd I do not wc1nt an open
    </p>
    <p>
     quarrel. I know that 'the \\ ould reproach me c1nd put up
a ,trong resii,tance 1f I .a,ked her outright to lectve. It
would therefore he better if OU would wme .i.nd deal
with tbe m.atter I do not \\clllt clll\o unplcc1,antt1c,., and
I dl't not want her to be put to c1nv cxpcn'le, but ,he
mui,t de.arty and dchnitel he told to go "
I would e,en h.ne been pr&lt;'pc1red to 'Ila the dtagon
if my mother had desired tt With grec1t amusement I
made preparauon., for the JOurne .md "tet oft' home.
As "tOOn c11, I entered the old house, I \\a'I aware of the
inva,ion of c1 new 1,pint The la1ge comfortable sitting
room, in particular, had as,mned c1 gloomv, chcerleS'I and
impo,er1shed appea1c1n&lt;.c E,enthmg ,;ccmcd cc1rcfull
look .. d aftc-,md under control. 1 here wt.Te r,o called
"runners" on the old ohd floor, long dc11l r,tr1ps m.ule
"frpm cheap and ugly m.11enc1l, to protec.t the 8001 boc1ulr,
and save cleaning The old piano wht&lt; h bad 1,tood
unused in the dr.iwmg room for year&amp; wc1r, al,;o cm-eloped
in c1 protective cover, .and although my moth&lt;T hc1d te.1
and cakes ready for me and had \rted to make tbmgr, looL.
    </p>
    <p>
     as pleasant a possible, there \\d't 'tuch an atmO'tphere of
old maid's meticulou,;ness and naphthalene about the
place, that as soon as I came in I smiled at Dl mother
16o .
and wrink.ted up my nose. She undentood me imme­
diately.
I bad hardly sat down when the dragon came in,
trotted along the runnellf towards me and did me the
honour of asking at great.length how I wao, ing on.
I inquired in detail ,H to how 11he wa keeping and
apologi.,ed for the old hou11e that did not pt&gt;rhap offer
every comfort to which ,he wa-, accustomc&lt;J. Taking the
lead in the comt&gt;nation away from my mother, ,he
.adopted the r6le of mistre.,., of the house, w to the tea,
eagerly replied to my polite remark'i and OJcemed rather
flattered, tit.at al'io uncao, and di-,rruo,tful about mv
exce110Jive frienttline,;.,_ Her .,u,;piciom were aroused but
she had no option but to accept In courte,;ie,; .,,nd to
respond with dt!r own .,tore of somewhat antiquated
polite phrases. Diplaying appareni:_mutual devotion and
    </p>
    <p>
     etcn,, tl:&gt;c evening drew on. We hearlil wihed each
\ther a goud night'i, o,leep and Jcft each other-m.e
diplomat of the old 11chool Yet, deo,pite the 11weetmeat,
I think the df'mon did not o,lecp mnch" that night, while
I rt&gt;11ted ,,,ntcntedlv, and m, poor mother, after perhaps
many night,; p.i.,r,cd in a 11tate of annm .inc.e and depre,,;­
ion, 11lcpt again for tht&gt; hrn timt' "ith .i eeli11g of ing
the 11olc mio,tre,, in her O\\ n hou-,c.
At breakfast the following morning, we began the
same polite game. M mother, l\ho had onlv lii.tened
quietl and intcnth· the pre,iou, c,enin. now partici­
pated with cnjoment, dnd we o,e1whehned Schnie-'el
with polite phra'le'i which dro, e ht'I" into a corner and
made her unh.1ppv. She reali-.ed quite well that these fine
phrase did not come from m, mother' heart. I almost
felt sorry for the old maid as o,he b«ame anxiou'I, tried
F 161
to humble herself and praised everything, but I thought
of the dismiued housemaid, of the discontented-looking
cook who had only remained {or my mother's lake, I
    </p>
    <p>
     thought of the covered piano nd the whole wretched
atmosphere in my father's hitherto pleasant house, and
I remained adamant.
After the meal I told Ill mother to go and lie down a
little, and I rc-mained ,tlone with her ,ouin.
"Are you ac.customed to having a ,Jeep after a meal?"
I inquired politel. "If so, don't let me disturb you.
I wanted to talk to you about something, but it is not
so urgent."
"Oh, please go on. I never leep during "the day.
Tt:ank .u,oodness I am not so old yet. I am quite at
your service." '
"Thank you Ver ipuch, Miu 5chniebel. I wanted to
express M gratitude to OU for the kindness you have
shol\o:i toward mv mother. She would bave been very
lonely without OU in thi'I large hou.,e. However, things
are going to be changed no"."
"What I" she cried, rising to her fret "How c1re things
going to be changed?"
"1'on't y.&gt;u know yet? My mothc-r ha., at lc1.,t dl"cided
    </p>
    <p>
     to fulfil my old wish for her to come and live with me.
·Naturally we cannot lea,e the old houi.e empty, '10 it
will soon be put up for gle."
The lady gazed at me disconc.tttedl.
\ves, I am sorry, too," I continued regrrtfulh. "This
has been a very tiring time for ypu. You have taken such
a kind and practical intc:ret in the house that I cannot
thank you enough."
"Bht what shall 1---where shall 1---?"
16.1
"'Oh, we shall &amp;nd a solution to that. You will of
course have to look out for somewhere else to live, but
ther.,: is no great hurry. You will be glad ·yourself to
take things easier."
She had remained stanciing. She was still polite but
her tone of voice had become considerably sharper.
"'l don't know what to say," she t.ried bitterl. "'Your
mother, sir, promised to let me live here;; it was a per­
manent arrangement. Now, after I have taken an interest
i,i the house and helped your mother with everything,
    </p>
    <p>
     I am turned out into the street."
She beg-.ln to sob and wanted to run away, but I took
hold of her lhin hand and pressed her back into the
easy-chair.
"It ii; not as 4t&gt;ad as all that," I 'laid ,;roiling. "It does
alter circumstances a little because m\ mother wants to  r1J\. from here. However, the sale of the house was
not decidul by hct, but bJ me, as I am the ownCA M
mother will see to it that OU are not rec,tricted in your
search for a new home and she will -make the necessary
arrJ.ng&lt;&gt;. ,ems for it herself. You will thus be more
comfortable than , ou were previou,;h and you will still,
so to speak, be a gue .. t of hero; "
Then came the exp&lt;'c.tcd 1t·proachc,;, arroganc.e, weep­
ing, alternate pleading and boasting, but in the end the
sullen woman rea'li,;ed thJ.t tht. wise,;t thing to do 1'a'i to
accept the ,;ituation. She then withdrew to her room.and
did not even appe,tr for wffee.
My mother thought we ought to c,end it up to her
room, but I wanted to ha, e m, rct'nge after all this
polite pla and let Misc, Schniebel o;ra, there in her
    </p>
    <p>
     mood of independence until the c,cning when. alniough
163
quiet and sulky, she punctually appeared for dinner.
"Unforiunately, I have to go back to R. tomorrow," I
said during the meal, but if you should need me for ,;iny­
thing, mother, I could always c:\lme over again quickly."
While eaying this I did not look at her but at her
co11sin, and she realised what I meant. My parting from
IJcr was brief but almo111t cordial.
"My dear," pid my mother later, "you settled that
ery well. Thank OU very much. \Von't you play me
i.omething from your opera?"
I did not get at far as that, but a barrier had been
broken down and a new relationship began m be estab­
lished between the old lady and me. That was the be111t
that had,..come out of thi'I businco,s. She now had con­
fidence in me and I was pleased at the thbught of setting
up a small household with her after my long spell of
being homelell,\, I left my L.ind reg.irdll, to Mis!!, Schniebel
and fieparted with a feelin&amp; of contt'ntment. Shortly
    </p>
    <p>
     after my return, I began to look around here and there
where there were &amp;mall attra&lt;.tiVf" bouse'l to let. Tei'ler
helped me in thi'l rc"pe&lt; t and hi&amp; sill,ter mu,dly came
along, too. They both rejoiced with me and hoped that
botlr small cfamilies would live happill near each 01her.
In the meantime, I had \ent the 'l&lt;.ore of my opera to
Munich. Two month'l later, 111hortl after my mother'&amp;
arrival, Muoth wrote to me thdt it had been accepted
but that it could not be rehearsed that sea111on. It would,
hdwevcr, be performed at the beginning of next winter.
So I had good news to tell my .mother. When Tei'ler
heard about it, he danced for joy and arranged a cele­
bration.
My mother wept when we moved into our attractive
164
little house, and said it was not good to be transplanted
in one's old age, but I thought it wa, a very good move,
as did the -Teisers, and it pleam me to !aCC how much
Brigitte helped my motllq. The girl had few acquain­
tancei. in the town and while he1 brother mi. at the
    </p>
    <p>
     theatre, she often felt lonely at home, although 1,he did
not ·adroit it. Now, 1,he often came to see u, and not only
helped us to get ,traight and settle in, but al&lt;,o helped
my mother and me along the difficult path of living
t9gether harmoniomly. Sht. knew how to make it
cipparent to the old lady when I had the need to be
quiet and alove; she was often at hand to help me out.
he al&amp;o pointed out to me m,lm of m mother's naed,
and wishe&lt;, whi'h I had never gucs,ed and about which
my mother had nc, er told me.  we !iiOOD \ettled down
in our peaceful little home. "hid1 wao, different and
mc,re 1m,de1,t than my pre,iouo, &lt;.onception of a home,
but which wa1, good and pleasJnt enough for one who
had "not progreo,sed anv further than I had.
My mo1!1r ... now l&gt;&lt;·c.1mc· familiar 0\\ith ..ume of my
mu..ic..  did not like it cill and did not i.a, much about
it, but o,hc saw and belie,ed that it wa1, not ju\t a pa11,ime
Jnd .i game·, but th,u it waii work that was to be taken
..e1i'ousl, AbO\e all, ,he \\ao, surpri.,ed to hnd that the
mmician's life, wJ1kh ,;he hacl con\idered to be very
    </p>
    <p>
     precarious, \\as harclh le., .... trenuous that the bm,iness
life that 111 lcltc t.uher had lt.d. We no" found it
ea!iiier to talk about him and gradualh I heard numerous
tale\ about them both, about m gr.indparents and about
In own childhood. I enjr,cd hearing about the p.tst
Jnd the family, and I n" longcr felt as if I did not bcJ.ong.
On the other hand, mv mother learned to let me go
165
my own way and to have confidence in me, evelJ when I
locked myself in my room during working houn, or when
I was irritable. She had been vy happy with my father
and it had made her trial, it'd tribulations with the
Schniebetwoman all the harder to bear. She now gained
confidence again and gradually stopped talking about
becoming old and lonely.
In the midst" of all this comfort and modat happine11,
the feeling of grief and diSSd.tiwacuon with which I had
lhed so long, became submerged It did not 11mk 1"
unfathomable depths but lingered deep down m my soul.
It con&amp;onted me on many a mght and ,na1ntained its
    </p>
    <p>
     rigts. The more remote the pa,t seemed, the more w.is
I aware t,f my love and my ,orrow whicll \\ere ever with
me as a quiet reminder. Oa-asionally, in the past, I
thought I had been iu love. When I wao, still a youth,
infatuated with prett carefree Liddy, I thought I knew
about love, then agam, when I fint saw Gertrude .ind
felt that she was the .ino,wer to m, question-. and obscure
wishC'I, when the pain began and pao,0,100 ,md unknown
depths suc.ceeded friend&amp;hip and understanding, and
finaJly when she was lost to me, I thought I lnew wh.it
love \\clS Mv lme for her h.ad persined and w,n alwaS
wuh me and I knew that I would never desire another
woman and wi,h to kiss ,mother om,m'11 lip ,ince
Gertrude had won mv heart
Her father, whom I v1111ted from time to ume, now
seemed to le.no"' .about my feehnA., tow.irds he1 He
asked me for the music of the prelude whith I hc1d
written for her weddmg and di,playcd a quiet goodwill
towa;ds me He muo,t have sensed how glad I wao, to
ha,,,. news about her and how reluctant I was to .ik,
    </p>
    <p>
     166
and he paued on to me much of the contents of her
letters. They often contained something bout me,
parlicularly in regard to the opera. She wrote that a
good singer had been fqnd for the soprano part, and
how pleased she would be to hear thi11, mucll beloved
work in its entirety at la11,t. She was al'° glad that I
now had my motherwith me. I did not know what she
wrote about Muoah.
My life proceeded pea&lt;efuJly; the undercurrents no
+anger forced their way to the 11,urface. I was working on
a Mass and had ideas for an oraLorio for which I still
needed thl text. When I was obliged to think about  the opera, it was like an alien world to me. My ffltl'lic
was developing along other line'I; it wa becoming more
simple and mo:e pcac.eful; it aim was to soothe, not to
excitt&gt;
Ourmg. this time, the Tei11,Cro, were a great comfort to
me. We saw each other almost ever day. We read, 1nade
mu11,ic, went for walks together and joined eac.h other
on ree d:i.s and outingo,. Onh in tlie 'lummer, when I
    </p>
    <p>
     did not · .;h to hinder the!!,C 11,trenuom wallers, did we
part for a few weeks. The Tei'ICr\ agam wandered
around the Tirol and Voralberg, and sent me"small bxes
of cdelwci1111,. I. however, took m' mother to relatives in
North Germany, fhom 11,he visited ever Car. I settled
down by the shore of the North Sea. There, day and
night, I heard the old 11,0ng of the sea. and in the sha,
fresh air it accompanied my thoughts and melodies.
From here I had the courage to write ro Gertrude at
Munich for the fint time, 110t to Mrs. Muoth, but to
my friend Gcrtnide whom I told about m,· mus and
my dreams. Perhaps it will give her pleasure, I thought,
167
and a few kind words and a friendly greeting n do no
harm. Against my own will I could not help hut mistrust
my friend Muoth, and I was continually a little woJ'l"ied
on Gertrude's account. I kne. him too well, this self­
willed mlancholy man, who was accustomed to giving
w;ty to his moods and never made 11acrilkes for anyone,
who was carried away by powerful urR-es and who, in
    </p>
    <p>
     more thoughtful hours, saw his whole life as a tragedy.
Hit really wa11 an illness to be lonely and misundeutood,
as my good friend Mr. Lohe had declared, then Muo.·
suffered more from this illneu than anyone else.
I had no news from him. He did no,t write: Even
trude only sent me a short note of thanks asking me
to tome 10 Munich earlv in the autumn, ps rehearsals for
my opera would commence there at the beginning of
the season.
At the beginning of September, when we were all in
town again and back to our every-da,· life, the Teisers
came to my house one e,·ening to have a look at the
work I had done during the summtr. Tht mo,t impor­
tant work was a short lyrical piece for two violins and
the piano. We played it. Brigitte sat down h the piano;
above my \i1usic I could see her head and her thick'
plaited fair hair, the top of which gleamed like gold in
the candle-light. Her brother 'ltood bede me and played
the first violin part. It wa'I 11imple, lvrical music, which
sottly pined and faded away like a 'inmmer evening,
    </p>
    <p>
     neither happy nor sad, hut which hovered in the mood
of an evening that i'I ending, like a doud glowing at
sunset. The Tci'len liked this short piece, particularh·
Brigi'1,e. She rarely said anything about my music, but
quirtly maintained a kind of girli,h awe towards me,
168
regarding me with admiration, for she considered me to
be a great maestro. Today she took courage an,d expressed
herparticolar pleasure. She looked at me frankly with
her light blue eyes andtpodded so that the light glim­
mered on her blonde plaits. She was very preft.y, almost
beautiful.
In order to please-.ier, I took her piano part and wrote
a dedication in pencil above the music: e"To my friend
Brigitte Teiser," and handed it back to her.
"That will alway&amp; be on-r thi,; little piece now," I said
rclllantly and bowed. She read rhe dediation &amp;lowly and
blushed. s1ie.held out her small &amp;trc,ng hand to me and
huddenly her eyes filled with tears.
"Are you serious?" she ao,ke&lt;l quietly.
    </p>
    <p>
     "Oh, y&lt;.-s," I &amp;aid, and laughed. "And I rhink thi,;
pi&lt;'&lt;"f' of mu,;ic o,uit&amp; OU ver wclL. Mi&amp;-. Brigirt."
I w.as "llrprised to 11ee that her e,e., were o,till filled
with tears: her reaction wa&amp; &amp;o eamt:lll and femininc.'-but
I did not pa anv further attention to the matt. Teiser
nolf put 1.i \'iolin a\\aV, and my"mother. who already
knew l\l ,L he liked, filled the glas,;c., with wine. The
c.onversation became liveh·. \\"c argued about a new
operetta wltith had been produced a few \leeks ealier,
and I only remembered the little incident with Brigitte
again later in th e\'cning whf'n both of them departed
and she again looked at me strangeh·.
In the meantime, rehean,al,; had c.ommenced on ·mv
optra at Munich. As one of the prindpal part wasi
Muoth's good handll and Gcrtrudl· h.id praised the
soprano, the orcheMra and the thorm, became m\ chief
concern. I left m, motbtr in the c.ire of Ill\' friengs and
travelled to Munic.h.
The morhing after my arrival, I travelled along the
0attractive f,road streets to Schwabing and to the quietly
    </p>
    <p>
     situated house where Muoth lived. I had almost t:'om­
pletely forgotten about the oprita. I only thought about
him and t;ertrude and how I would find them. The cab
stopped at an almost rural by-road in front of a small
house which stood amongst autumnal-looking trees.
Yellow maple .leaves lay on both sides of the road, swept
into heaps.
With some trepidation I went in. The house gave 111
the impression o being comfortable and prosperous. A
· servant took my coat.
Ir the large room into which I was led, I recognii,ed
two large old paintings which had bee\1 brought from
the Imthor's hou11ie. On one wall there wa, a new portrait
of Muoth which had bren painted in Munich, and while
I was looking at it, Gertrude came in.
My heart beat quickly at eing her again after such a
long time. She had changed into a more \Criou\, mature
woman, but she smiled at me in the old friendly way ;and
held out her hand to me.
"'\{ow ar you?" she asked in c1 friendl&gt; manner. "You.
    </p>
    <p>
     have grown older but OU look well. We have expected
you for a long time.'"
She inquired about all her friends, abyut her father and
my mother, and a, she became interei.tcd and overcc1me
her first shyness, I regarded her in the same light a, I .. . had done an the past. Suddenly, my embarra .. ,ment
disappeared and I talked to her· .a, to a good friend,
told her how I had ,pent the \Ummer by the i.ea, about
my wg,k, the Tei.en, and finally even about poor Mi .. ,
Schni,bel.
.. And now," she exdaimed, your operans going to be
performed! You wiJI be very pleased about it."
"'Nes," J said, "but I am even more pleased· at the
thought of hearing you.ting again."
She smiled. "J shall be pleased, too. I sing quite often,
but almost always for myself alone. I shall sing all your
songs. I have them 'here and I do not let the dust settle
on them. Stay for a meal with us. My Jiusband will be
coming soon and he can go along with you to see the
'\Vnductor in the afternoon."
We went into the music-room and .-,he.sang my songs.
    </p>
    <p>
     I became tiuiet and found it diffic.uh to remain calm.
Her voice ha&lt;I become more mature and sounded more
confident, but it soared as easily as ever and anspcfrted
me in my memory to the best days of my life, so that I
looked at the piano ke,s as if beJitched, quietly played
the we!l-knon notes and, li&amp;tening with dosed eyes,
could not for moments distingui,h between the pl'esent
and the past. Did she not belong to m&lt;' and my life?
Were we n'&gt;t as near to each other-as brother and sister,  and ve11· !'&gt;SC friends? To be sure, she would have sung
differently with Muoth !
We sat chatting for a while, feeling happy ancf not
having much to la" to each other, for we knew that no
explanations were necessary between us. How things
were with her an:i what her relations were like between
her and her hu&amp;band, I did not think about then. I
would be able to observe that later. In any event, the
had not swerved from her path and become untrue to
her nature. and if she had a load to bear, she certainly
bore it with dignitv and without binernes'§.
An hour later, Heinrich, who had heard thar"l had
    </p>
    <p>
     171
anived, came in. He immediately began to tal about
the owa, which seemed more important to everyone else
than it did to me. I uked him bow he was and how he
liked being in Munich.
"Like e'vcrywhere else," he said seriously. "The public
does not like me because it feels that I do not care about
it. I am hardly ever favourably feceived at my hrst
appearance. I always have to hold people first and then
carry them away with me. I thus sucl·ecd without being
popular. Sometimes I also sing badly, I must adIDit thar
myself. Well, your operd will be a suc.cess-OU can
count on that-for you and for me. Toda we shll go
and see the conductor, tomorrow wr 11,hall invite the
soprano tp come and see u'l and whoever fl'lc OU wii,h to
meet. Tomorrow morning there ii, an orchestral rehearsal.
I think you will be satJsfied."
During lunch I ob11,crH.-d that he was ex.ceptionalh
polite towardi, Gertrude, l\hich made me 'luspiciom,. It
was like that the.whole time I Wd'I in l\lunkh, and I saw
    </p>
    <p>
     them both every day. The were an extremeh hdn&lt;l0i9mc
couple and made an imprcs11ion wherever the· went.
Yet they were cool towards each other, and I thought   that only &lt;krtrude'11 strength ol d1aracter and superior
muure made it posible for her to ma,l tbi,; rnolne.,,
with a polite and dignified ,·enecr. It f PJX"ared .t'I if ,he
had not long awalened lrom her pa11,.,ion for thi11 hand50me
man and i,till hoped to n.-cover her former inward i,till­
ne. In an' event, she acted in accordanc.e with ,tood
form. She was too well-bred and ·fine a person to pld
the part of the di'lillu'lioned ,md misunderstood woman
before friends and to show her secret sorrow to anyone,
even ff she could not hide it from me. But she could
171
also not have endured any look or gesture of understand­
ing or sympathy from me. We spoke and a,:ted.all the
tin!e as if there was no cloud over her mo1rriage.
How long this state otafl'airs would lfe maintained was
uncertain, and depended on Muoth, whose idcalculable
nature I saw kept under restraint by a woman for the
first time. I was SC:rry for both of them but I was not
    </p>
    <p>
     very surprised to find this situation. They had both
enjoyed their passion; now they had either to learn
t11signation and preserve this i.1appy time in their mem­
ory, or they must learn to find their way to a new kind
of happin,;s. and love. Pcrh:ips a child would bring
them together again, not back to the abandoned Par1dise
garden of love;, ardour, but to a new will to li'9&lt;" together
and to draw cloo;cr to each other. Gertrude bad the
strf"171h and serenity of charact&lt;J' for it, I knew. I did
not dare to think whether Heinrich al,;o had the same
capa«;ity. However sorrv I was that the fierce st&lt;frm of
their first passion and pleasure in each_ other had alread·
papcd, I  a!" pleased at the wa, both of them behu·ed,
prescrvhi;, ,heir dignity and rc"ipcct not onh· in front of
people but also in each other':, companv.
Meanwhile, I did not acet·pt the im·itatitm to stay at
Mnoth's hom,e, and he did llOl pref!is me. I went there
every day and it gladdened me to 'ice that Gertrude liked
me to come, and enjoyed c·hatting and making music
with me, so that the pleasure was not onh mine.
    </p>
    <p>
     It was now definite that my opera would be perfonned
in December. I sta·ec:l in Munich a fortnight, was present
at all the orchestral rcl1ea;·sals, made alterations and
adjustments here and there, but saw the work ip good
hands. It seemed strange to me to sec the singers, the
173
violinists and \flautists, the conductor and the chorus
ec:c:upi with my work, which had now become alien
to me, and had life and breath which were no lo
mine .
.. Just wut," said Heinrich Muoth, "you will soon have
to breathe the accursed air of publicity. I almost wish
for your sake that the opera will dot be a success for
you will then Jrave the mob after you. Then you will
have to deal with locks of hair and autographs, and
taste the approbation and kindne,;s of the admiri
public. Everyone is alread talking about Ollr &lt;.rippled
leg. Anything lile that makes one populr "
A¥er the nccessarv rehearsals I cook my departure,
arranging.to come back a few daS befyre the perfor­
    </p>
    <p>
     mance. Teiser asked me endless que,;tions about the
rehearsals. He thought of numerous orchestral details
which I had hardh con-.idered and he was more exdted
and ahxious about the whole affair than I was. When
I invited him and hi&amp; sister to come with me to the
performance, he Jumped for joy On the oth&lt;.T hand, 1ny
mother did not wel&lt;.ome the winter journev and all the
excitement, and I agreed th,ll i.he ,;hould i.t.ay behind.
GraJually, I'began to frcl more e,dtt'd and had to tal..e
a grlass of port at night to help me to sleep
Winter came earh, and our little hpu\C and garden
lay deep in snow when, one morning, the Teiscr,; called
for me in a cab. My mother wa,ed goodbye to U'l from
th/ window, the cab drove off, and Tc.iser, with a thick
scarf round his n&lt;.-ck, sang a travellfng -.ong. During the
whole long journev he wa lile .i boy tra,elling home
for tly' Christma'l holiday.,, and pretty Brigitte wa11o
glowi"lg, expres11ing her plea11ure more quietly. I was
174
glad of their company, for I was no longer calm, and
    </p>
    <p>
     awaited the events of the next few days like one under
sentence.
Muoth, who was wairillg for me at the railway station,
noticed it immcd.iately. ''You arc suffering /om stage­
&amp;ight, young man," he said and laughed with pleasure.
"'Thank goodness fo1· that I After all, you are a musician
and not a philospher."
He seemed to be right, for my excitement lasted until
tile performance took place, a1d I did not sleep during
those nights. Muoth wa11 the 011I calm penon amongst
us all. Tefser burned with excitement; he came to every
rehearsal and made endlec;s c-ritici1-m11. Huddled up aad
attentive, he sat beside me during rehear!!ials,,.beat fime
with his denc'1ed hand during difficult passages, and
alternately praised or shook his head.
·'The,e·s a Bute mis.11ing!" he cried out at the fir'lt
orchestral rehearsal which he attended, so loudlII that
the conduc-to1 looked across at us with annoyance.
"We ha·: had to omit it," I said smiling .  "Omit !lute? Wh·? What a Ual thing to do! Be
careful, or they will ruin the whole overture."
    </p>
    <p>
     I had to laugh and hold him bac-k forcib"· becaute he
was ·so critical. But during his favourite part, where the
violas and cellos came in, he leaned back with dosed  eyes, pressed my hand from time to time, and afterwards
whispered to me abashed: "That almo'lt brought tear,
to my eyes. It is beautiful I"
I had not yet heard the soprano part sung. It now
seemed strange and sad to hrar it sung for the first time
by another singer. Sh&lt;' sang it well, and I thanked her
as soon as she had finished, but inward!· I thought of
175
the afternoon when Gertrude had sung those words,
.and I h.ad a feeling of unadmittcd discontent as when one
gives a precious possession away and sees it in strange
hands for the fu\t time.
I saw little of Gertrude during those days. She obsened
my acitement with a smile and let me alone. I had
visited her with the Teisers. She rkeived Brigitte very
warmly, and tle girl wa, full of admiration for the
beautiful, gracious woman. From that time she enthused
about Gertrude and praised her volubl, and her broth.­
    </p>
    <p>
     did likewise.
I can no longer remember the details of the two .da\l
eding the performance; everythii1g is cnfuscd in my
mind. Ttiere were additional reasons for excitement:
one singer be&lt;.ame hoarM!, another was annoyed at not
having a larger part aqd beha, cd in an ofkndt"d mannl'r
at the last reheari-,ll; the conductor became cooler and
more -formal a&amp; .i result of my dirt.'&lt;"tion&lt;,. Muoth c.tme
to my aid at opportune moments, smiled c.almh J.t J.ll
the tumult, and on this occasion was of more , aluc; to
me than Teiser, who ran here and there and like a
demon making critic.hm-, e\.enwhere. Brigitte looled
at me with It:verence but also with some -,ymp.tth when,
dur.ing quieter period,;, we sat together in the hotel,
weary and rather 'lilent.
The da'\-S passed by and the evening of the perfm­
mance arrived. \Vhile the audience was rntering the
thiatre, I stood behind the 'ltage without ha,·ing am-thing
more to do or to advi-,e. :Finalh·, I· stacd with Muoth,
who was already in his CO\tume, and in a small room
    </p>
    <p>
     away from all the noi&amp;e wa, \lowly empting half a
I bottle of c.hampagne.
176
"Will you have a glass?" he asked sympathetically.
"No," I said. "Doesn't it over-excite you?"
what?- All the activity outside? It is always like
that."
"I mean the champagne."
"Oh no, it soothes me. I alway&amp; have a gla,;s or two
before I want to dd anything. But go now, it is nearly
time."
I was led by an attendant into a private box, where I
2.lready found Gertrude and both the Tci11&lt;.Ts, as well
all an important personage from the management of the
theatre, who greeted me with a &amp;mile.
llicec.tly aftcrward., we heard the second bell. Gertrude
gavt' me a fricJldlv look and nodded to me. 1eiser,who
&amp;at behind me, seited m ann and pinched it with e:ii.c.ite­
mc-nt The theatre bt'Came dark, and the i,ound,; of my
ovt·i ture :.c,kmnly ro.,e to me from below. I now became
    </p>
    <p>
     ulmc;r.
Then my work appeared before me, !iO fam,iliar and
C' &lt;,o alit&gt;· ., ""11ich no longer needed ine and had a life
of it., oY.i .. The pka'&gt;urei. and troubles of past days, the
hope,; and sleeplc.,., nights, the-passion and longing of
that period confrontt·d me, det.uhed amP transfolmed.
Emotions expc.Tienn·d in secret were tr:msmitted clearly
and mo\'ingl v., a thoui.aml unknown people in the
theatre. Muoth appeared and beg-,m singing with some
r&lt;.-serve. Then his voice brrew &lt;,tronger; he let himself
go and sang in hi., tkcply pa.,.,ion.1te manner: the sop&amp;no
re11,pondcd in a high. '&gt;WCet ,·oi&lt;.c. Then came a part
which I wuld so well reme1.1bcr lu·aring Gertrude sing,
which cxpre!&gt;Scd mv ad-niration for her and was a quiet"
confci,.,ion of m,· IO\ e. I averted m, glance anJ looked
l'" .. I I
into her briglit eyes which acknowledged me and greeted
pie waz;mly, and for a moment the memory of my whole
youth was like the sweet fragr,mce of a ripe frllit.
From that mo-.1ent I felt moff calm and listened like
    </p>
    <p>
     any othermember of the audience. There was a burst
of applause. The singers appeared before the curtain and
bo. Muoth was recalled a numbel"of times and smiled
calmly down irito the now illuminated theatre. I was
also pressed to appear, but I was far too oven.ome by
emotion, and had no deire to limp out of my pleaw\,l
retreat.
Teiser, on the other hand, laughed with :I face Jike
the rising sun. put hi arm through mint" and ali.o
impe'tuously shook. both hands o{ the imP,Ol'tant person  f age &amp;om the theatre management.
The banquet w.is rad and would h,nc bl.-en hdd
even if the opera had been a failure. We travelled to
the banquet in c.abs, Gertrude with her husband, and
the Tt&gt;isers and I together. During the short journey,
Brigitte, who had not Cl said a word, suddenly began
to weep. At first she tried to rei.train her.elf, but she
soon covered her face with her hands and let the tears
ftow. I did not like to say anything and wa surprised
that. Teiser wa, likewise silent and asked no question-,.
He just put his arm around her and q1urmured a fow
    </p>
    <p>
     kind, comforting words as one would to a child.
Later, during the '\baking of hand'I, good wishes and
toalll, Muoth winked at me yrcastic.ally. People inquired
with interest about my next work and were disappointed
when I said that it would be an or.itorio. Then they drank
'to my next opera, whic.h has never been written to thi,da,
Only'much later in the evening, when we had departed
178
and were going to bed, was I able to ask Teiier what was
the matter with his sister, and why she had wept. She,
hertelf, had long since gone to bed. My friend looked at
me searchingly and witJ10spme surprise,shook his head
and whistled, until I repeated my question.
"You are as blind as a bat," he then flaid reproachfully.
"Have you not notited anything then?"
"No," I said with a growing suspicio9 of the truth.
"Well, I will tell you. The girl has been fond of you
fOI' a long time. Naturally, !ilae has never told me w,
any more than she has you, but I have noticed it, and to
tell the tru1h, I should be very happ if something came
    </p>
    <p>
     of it."
"Oh dear I" I said with real i,adnei.s, "but what was
the matter thi: evening?"
"V,·: mt"an, why did she weep? You are a child! Do
you think wr did not M!t"?"
"Sec: what i"
"Good heavem! You don't need to tell me anthing,
an,S you w, e I ight to be i,ilent about it in the past: but
then you sln,uld not have looked at Mrs. Muoth like that.
Now we understand quite clearh."
I did not ask him to leep m, i.t:tret. I lmew I c.&amp;uld
trui.t him. He gentl plac.ed his hand on mv shoulder.
"I can now w\"Jl imagine, my clear friend, all that OU
have gone through during thei,e ,cars without telling us
anything. I once had a similar experienc.e 1mself. Let os
stay together now and male good music, o,hall we? /fhd
al lt'e that the girl i!t consoled. Give me ,our hand!
It has been wonderful! Well, good-b·e until I sec vo11
again at homt' ! I am tr.1, elling h.ack with Brigitte
tomorrow morning "
    </p>
    <p>
     I jI
We then parted, but he came running back .a few
moments ater and said with great seriousness: "'The
ftue must be included again in the next performance.
Don't forget! " "
That was how the day of rejoicing ended and we all
lay awake for a long time thinking about it. I thought
abo\Jt Brigitte, too. I bad seen a great deal of het" all
this time and J was a good friend of hers, which was all
I desired, just as Gertrude had been a good friend of
mine, and when Brigitte had guessed my love for anoth1tr
it was the same for her as it was for me when I had
discovered the letter at Muoth's house and had later
loaded my revolver. Although it made me feel sad, I
could not.help but smile. ,
I spent most of the remainder of my days in Munkh
with the Muoths. It was no longer like those afternoons
in the past when the three of us first used to sing and
play together, but in the after-glow of the perfonnance
of the opera, there was an unspoken mutual remembrance
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter eight
    </head>
    <p>
     of that time, and also an occasional n·-kindling of forrncr
feelings between Muoth and Gertrude. When I had
finally said goo_cl-hve to them, I looked hack £or a while
at the peacdul-looking hou'§c among.,t the bare tree11.
I hoped to return there some da and would gladlv have
given my little succes1 and happinc-ss :awa&gt; in order to
help those two in,idc to draw dose to ea&lt;.h other again
and for alwavs.
180





After my rc1urn home, as Heinrich haq predicted, the
results of my sucl·ess pursued me with many undesirable
aQd also some amusing conse&lt;tuenc.ei.. It was easy to
dispose of commercial problems by putting matter rela­
ting to tht! opera in the hands of an agent. But there
were also visitors, newo;paper people, publi!,hers and
    </p>
    <p>
     stupid letters, and it took me some time to grow ate.us- . tomed to the small burdens of sudden fame and to
ren&gt;\'·· from the first disillusionment. P&lt;.-ople claim righn
faom well-L.nnwn people in remaAabl&lt;' wa!t-110 distinc­
tion is.made between infant prodigie'I, compo.,crs,epocts,
lhie\'es and murdcr&lt;·n. Om· per,on wanto, the celebrity's
pl1't&lt;&gt;graph a1,other hi., autograph; a· third begs for
mone; e,·1..,r young olleague !,ends in hi'I work, is
extremely flattering and ask,; for an opinion. It one doeo;
nut answer, or if one give an unfavourabl69opinion the
Si\111' admirer sudden! becomes bitter, uncivil and re-1ent­
ful. !\fag-.11incs .want 1hc &lt;cld&gt;rity's photograph, news­
papers dcllCribe his life. his origin and his appearance:
school-friend'! remember him, and di'ltant relatives declare
they said Cars ago that their l'Omin would bec,9h1e
famous somt· day.
Amongst the letters of thh, kind whid1 harassed me,
there was also one from !\fi'ls Schniebcl whkh amused
me, and one from someone I had not thought aout £or
181
a long time. · It was from the fair Liddy who wrote to
    </p>
    <p>
     ,me, thout mentioning our toboggan-ride, but in the
strain of an old faithful mend. She had manicd a mlUic­
teacher in her li.ome town and,gave me her address' so
that I could soon send her all my compositions with a
flattering dedication to her. She enclosed a photograph
which, however, showed the well-known features grown
older and coai;sencd. I replied to her in very cordial
terms.
But these little thing, belonged to the minor iss
which left no import,1nt tr,1&lt;.e behind. Even the gootl
and re&amp;eshing fruiti. of my sue.cc, 11uch as t11aking the
ac.quaintan&lt;e of c.ultured and di11tinguic,heu people who
had' music in their souls and did not just talk about it,
did not blong to my real bfe, whic.h later, d.lt in the past,
remained detached, a,;id hac, ch,1nged very little since
then. All that remain11 is for me to tell you of the tum
of evC1C1ts of my closest friends.
Old Mr. Imthor did not entertJin as much as when
Gertrude had been there, but everv three weeks, amo11Sst
the numerous pictures at his hou'le, he held a musical
    </p>
    <p>
     evening with selected c.h.imber mu-.ic, whkh I regularly
attehded. I wmeume11 brought Tei'ler along with me,
but.Imthor pre'Slted me to come J.nd see him apart from
these visit. So I sometime&lt;. went there; in the evening,
which wa11 his favourite time, and kept him company in
his simph-fumished 11tudy, whert there was a portrait
of \;ertrude on one of the walls The old gentlem,m and
I, although outardl reiserved with eJ.ch other, gradually
came to a good undentanding and felt the need to tall
to each other, and it wa'I therefore not rare for uis to
talk a'&gt;ut what occ.upied our mind., most. I had to tell
182
him about Munich and I did not conceal l'he impression
I had received of the relationship between the couple
He-nodded understandingly.
"Everything may yet. turn out all aright," he said
sighing, "but we can't do anything. I am lookirfg forward
to the summer when I shall have m &lt;.hild with me for
twd months. I rart4y visit her in Munich and do not
care to go there. Beside,;, she bebaH· .. ,;o bra,eh· that I   do not want to disturb her and make her weaken."
    </p>
    <p>
     .Gcrtrude's letter did not bring amthing new. But
when she visited her father round about Ea11ter, and
also came t'o our little home, she looked thin dnd ten .. e,
and althougli i,he tried to be natural with m and to
cover things uv, we often saw an expre'l!tion of unafc.u,­
tomed hopelessness on her face, whid1 ha bet.ome
serin1i. I played my latco,t mw,ic-to her, hut \\hen I
aked her 10 "ing something to u,. \he gently shook her
head a.nd refu'lf'&lt;l.
"Another timr," she ,;aid um.crtainh:
\Ve coul_tf all ,;ee that i,he appeared Lo be unhappv, and
her father confessed to me later that he had sugge,;ted shr
should remain with him for good, but ,he had refued.
"Se loves him," I ,;aid.
He i,hrugged his shoulders and lool..t·d at me with
di,;trc'l'I. "I dun'\, know. \\'ho un andh'IC thi, misen !
But she said she wa, i,ta\ing with him for his ,;akl". He
is so bewildered and unhapp\ and net·ds her more thail
he thinks. J le docs not Sol\ an thing to her, but ifl i ..
written on hi,; face."
    </p>
    <p>
     Then the old man loweret.l hi,; \·oict anti said quite
softly and with lllhame:  She mcan5 he drinl.s."
"He has alway,; done that a little," I said, tnmg to
IR:_\
comfort him,· "but I have never seen him drunk. He
holds himself in restraint in that way. He is a nervous
type of person who is not used to self-discipline, 'but
perhaps causes himself more suing than he does other
people."
Nene of us knew how terribly these two fine people
sufkred in secret. I do not think th'.lt they ever stopt,ed
loving each otJ1er, but deep down in their nature they
did not belong to one another; they only drew closer
through passion and in the intoxication of exalted hows.
A calm acceptancf' of life and a tacit undt.Tstanding i
his own nature were thing!I that Muotl1 had nlver known
and Gertrude c.ould only bf' patient with and regre·t his
outf&gt;ursts, and deprei,i,iom, hi-. ,;wift t.hi\nge of mood!I,
his continual desire for i,elf-forgctfulnei,s and into.ica­
tion, but ishe could npt d1ange or live with them. So
    </p>
    <p>
     thev loved each othtr and Cl were ne\er quite clo'I&lt;' to
each ,other, and while he !law hirmelf cheated of his
secret hopes of fJnding peace and happine,;,i, through
Gertrude, she rcali'JCd and suffered in the knowledge that
her good intentions and !la&lt;.rificcs were in vain, and th.u
i,he could not comfort him and !lave him from himself.
Thus they bu.th had their St.-cret dream and dt-arest wii,h
sha!tered. The could onl remain together by maling
i.acrihc and showing forbearance, am' it ,ui. brave of
them to do this.
I only saw Heinrich again in the summer when he
brGught Gertrude to her father. He was more gentle
and attentive to her and to me than I had e,·er seen him
before. I perceived how much he feared to lose her, and
I also felt that he would never be ablt-to bear such a lot1s.
But slie wai. weary and desired nothing but rest and
184
quiet in · ordcf lo compose herself and. recover her
strength and tranquility. We "pent one mild evening
together in our garden. Gertrude ,;at between l\rigitte
    </p>
    <p>
     ana my mother, whmc nd r,hc held. lleinric.h walked
quietly lo and fro among,it the ro,;e,;, and Ipla,ed a
violin sonata with Teiscr on the terrace. The wa,
Gertrude rco,ted thca-c and &lt;'njocd tht pcac.e of tho
hour-., how Brigitt&lt;· aflcc tion.itcly p1c .. .,cd ,lo,;e to the
sad, beautiful woman, and how Muoth  with his head
blwed walled ahout quietlv in the· .,hadc and li,;tencd
t3 u-., arc things th.it ate indelihh stamped on my mind.
Aftcrward Hcinrid1 r,c1id ,;omewhat joline,h but \\ith
sad eye,;: "11.,t look .it the· three women '&gt;tiling there
together; the onl one amon.,t them who l,x,'1..-, hlpp,
i,; Ollr moth&lt;'r We ,;hould .tl,o tn to ow old' like her"
After thi'i, wt· all partt·d \\,l\'i. luoth tr,Lvcllcd alone
to :·&gt; ,·uth, Gertrude \\CUI with htr fath&lt;'r into the
moulllJ.in.,, the feh,·r., to ',tl'it·rm.n l, .md nn IQothcr
and I \\ent to the coa.,t of the Sorth ',t.a ag.,in. Theic I
ofr_en walled along the .,bore, li,tencd. to the -rea, and
thought a,., I had clone in m, \tmth, with J.m.uemcnt
and horror, about the ,;ad and scmcle,., contmion of lifr,
that one could Im c m , .iin, that people \\ Ian m&lt;·ant ,·cll
    </p>
    <p>
     towar-d'l t,u h 01lwr &lt;,hould \\Orl out their de-;tinit,
s&lt;'par.itcly, e.ith.onc going hi., own ine'\.plicable wa,,
aml how CJ.&lt; h would lilt· to help and dr.1w dmc to the
mhcr .in&lt;l Cl W,h un,tblc to do .,o, ,h in troublcJI
mc.ininglc..s clre.101.,. I of1en thought of \fuoth\ rl'm:JtL...
about ,outh and old age, and I wa, curiom, a,; to whether
life would ever '&gt;CCm .. imple an,J clt-.1r 10 nu. \h mother
smiled wh&lt;'n J mentioned thir, during com cr,..ition .in&lt;l
lool..t.'&lt;l really peaceful. She m.itlc lll&lt;' fcL·1 a!lha:,1ed h,
1:-;
reminding me of my friend Teiser who 1',a1 not yet old,
but old enough to have had hi hare of experience  and
yet went on living in a care&amp;ee way like a cllild, with
a Mozart mel004 on his lips. had nothing to do with
age, I saw that clearly, and perhaps our suffering and
ignoranc&lt;' was only the sickness about which Mr. Lobe
had talked to me. Or was that wise man another child
like Teiser?
However it may be, thinking and brooding did not
make conditions different. When music r,tirred my beipg,
    </p>
    <p>
     I understood everything without the aid of woqls. I wl'i
then aware of pure harmony in the essence of life and
felt that there must be a meaning and a jul.t law behind
evelything that happened. Even if this was an illuo;ion,
it helped ine to li\'e and was a comfort to me.
Perhaps it would have been better if Gertrude had not
parted from her husband for the summer. She had begun
to rec..over, and when I saw her ag-.ain in the autumn,
after my journey, she looked much better and capablf'
of managing again But the hoper, we had built on tJ1io;
improvement were destined to di'lappointment.
Gertrude had felt better while Maying with her father
for  few months. She had been abl&lt;" to indulge in her
nd for rest, an&lt;l with a feeling of relief rnuld remain in
this quiet state without a dailr battle. just as a tied
person yield11 to sleep when left alone. It appeared, how­
ever, that she was more exhau11cd than we had thought
an\i than he knew herself, for now that Muoth wc1, to
come for her soon, she bec.ame dispirited again, did not
sleep, and entreated her father to let her stay with him
    </p>
    <p>
     a little longer.
lmt1tor war, naturally rather alarmed at this, as he
186
thought she would be glad to return to. Muoth with
renewed strength and determination, but he did not
arg4e with· her, and even cautiously sugge'&gt;tecl a "longer
separation for the time peing with a vitew to a divorc.e
later. She protested agafn"st thi, with great tagitation.
"But I love him," she cried vehementl, "and I will
never be disloyal t0thim. Only it ii. -.o diflkult to live
with him! I just want to re.,t a little lonl?'J!r, perhap.,
another couple of months, until I feel i.tronger.''
fr. Imthor tried to comfort her. He hunselE had no
ogjection to having hii. child with him a little longer.
He wrote t'b Muoth telling him that Gcrtrudt' was still
not well and wi-.hed to remain with him for ,omc time
yet. Unfortunately, Muoth did not rccci,e this lfewi.
well. During the time the, had been ,eplrated, hi
longing for hi., wife had become vcr grl'clt. He had
looi..rd torward to seeing her agaif1 ,tnd wa., full of good
    </p>
    <p>
     resolutions for &lt;..omplctel', winning her love agaiq.
Im1J1or\ ktLer ume as a great di,appnintmcnt to him.
H&lt;. immcdiateh wrotc an anhrr, kttcr full of ,m,pidon,
about hilt father-in-law. He felt that the latter h..td
inffuenced her agaimt him .t'i he de,11 c-d ,1 dholution
of the marriage. He demanded an immec/.iatc meing
with·Gertrucle, whom he hoped to l\in me1 .igain. !\fr.
Imthor came to ,me with the letter and for a Ion time
we comidcrecl what should be done. We both thought
it would be best for a meeting hl't\\cen the rnuplc 10 he
avoided at the moment a., Gertrude ob, iou,h c.ould .,;t
stand anv outbursts of emotion. Imthor w .. h ven c.on­
cerned a;1d ao,kc&lt;l me if I l\ould go to -,ee !\luoth and
persuade him to leave Gertmdc in peace for a while.
I know now that I ,;hould h,l\ e &lt;lone th.u. At tlfe time
18j
I had some misgivings and thought it would be unwise
to let my friend know that I was his father-in-law's
I confidant and acquainted with things in his· life wh.ich
he himself did ot wish to disalpse to me. So I declined.
    </p>
    <p>
     and all "that transpired was· that Mr. lmthor wrote
another letter, which of course did not help matten.
:However, Muoth came over without warning -and
alarmed us.all with the scarcely restrained vehemence of
his love and ;uspicions. Gertrude, who did not lnow
about the short exchange of letters, was quite astonisl
and confused by his unexp&lt;.'&lt;'ted appearance and lt'is
almost violent emotions. There was a painftrl scene, the
details of which I did not learn. I only know that J\.iuoth
urgbl Gertrude to return with him to Munich. She
d«lared stie was ready to do as he wi'!thrd, if there was
no alternathe, but asked to ht allowed to remain with
her father a little longer as &amp;he was wt·ary and i.till
needed rest. He then accll'led her of wanting to fori.ake
him, and insinuated that she had been in,tigated by her
father to do so. He he&lt;.ame even more i.mpic.iouOJ wtaen
she gentl tried to explain, and in a fit of anger and
bitterness he was so foolii.h as to command her abruptly
to leturn to.,him. Her pride then a,,&lt;'rtcd iuelf. She
rellairu.-d c.alm but rcf ui.cd to listen to him further and
    </p>
    <p>
     declared that i.hc would now rt·main with her father in
any event. The morning following this 'iCene, Muoth
tried to conciliate her, and ashamed and repentant, he
now granted all her wi&amp;hes. He 1hen travt"lled back to
.Munic.h without coming to i.cc me ..
I was alarmed when I heard about it and i.aw the
trouble lying ahead which I had feared from the begin­
ning. '-:After that ugly and foolii.h i.cenc, I thought, it
188
might noW' be i long time before she woull:l feel calm
and strong enough to return to him, and in the mean­
tim6. there was a danger of his becoming reckle.,f, and
despite all his longing'!, lie might beccvne even more  eitrangcd from her. He would not long be able to
endure being alone in the house in whith he had hl"&lt;.n
happy for a time. H, would give Wa to de.,pair, drink
and perbaps go with other women \\ho 'Still r.an after him.
In the meantime, all J.s quiet. Ht' rofE' t Gertrude
and again a&amp;led for her forgivenc·,,. She. .tmwered hi1
1ti'l'::r, and in d .,,mpathetic .md fnendh manner urged
him to be patie111 I 'lo.tl\-httle of lw1 about thi1 time.
    </p>
    <p>
     Occ.1.1,ionally, of tried to p&lt; 1,uddc her to .,mg, but she
JlW.t.&amp; shook her heJd \'et ,cural time'i I found he at
the piano.
It i,eemed ,uJngc to me to '&gt;CC 1hi'&gt; bcJut1ful, proud
wom .,1, ... bom I h.,cl c1l\\.t,, ,«.n ,t, ,tron. c.heerful and
,e1cne, no,\ t.m1d .md o,hJL.cn to h&lt;.r HI\ bemg  She
&lt;,&lt;&gt;metirnc.·, came ro 'ICC m, mother, u1c1mred in .t fncndh
"a, ho\\ "c wc-r&lt;. L.ec·ping, ,.u hc'&gt;idt the old lad, on the  1,ric, ,tttee £,,r" ,hort ume, .md m.ult. ,m c1ttt'mpt to th.1.1
to her. It g1 icu"&lt;I mt· to he.1.r her .1.ml lO ee ho\\ clifhc uh
,he found u to ,mile Appt',trdnce, \\Crc.  pt up att H
ndthm I nor .m,one cli,c J..nc\\ of h&lt;·r ,orro", or regaukd
1l ao; .1 nl"l\Ous ,tate .md phniul \\Cdl..ne,o; o I ,ould
hardh lool into1 h&lt;.r CH'!! m \\hich htr unc.onfc,..ed
ricf, .ibout hid1 I ,u1 not '!llt1ppo..ed to I..no\\, "J.lll 'iO
dc,trh Wtitten. \\'e talked .md 11'c&lt;l and met a!I .if
eu·nthing \\dS the same a\ il h.1d .1.l\\J"' ht·en, and ,et
we felt uncmnfort.1ble in CJth otht1", ptt.o,cncc and
avoided each other In tht" nndo,t of thii, c;ad confmion
of foding111, I \\a'&gt; now Jnd then ,eucd b, the ,tion,
189
    </p>
    <p>
     causlnt me· sudden excitement, that her heart no longer
belonged to her husband and that she was &amp;ee; and it
was now bp to me not to lose her again, but to wi11 her
for myself anq shelter her 1¥' my side from all storms
and sonows. I then locked tnyself in my room, played
the passionate and yearning music of my opera, which I
su\idenl loved and understood aga\P, lay awake at nights
full of lon_ging, and ag-c1in suffered all the former laugh­
able tonnentl of youth and unfulfilled desire,, no less
intensely than in the past when I had first desired her
and given her that single, unforgettable kiss. I fef lPil
burn on my lips again and in a few hours.it destroyed
the peace and resignation of Cars.
Only in Gertrude's prC'iencc did m passion subside.
El'en if I-had been foolish and ignoble et,ough to pursue
my desires and, without consideration for ht"f busband
who was my friend, hhd tried to win her heart, I should
ha, been ashamed to show anything but sympathy and
consideration whn faced b' this sad, gentle woman, who
was so completely wrapped up in her 'IOrrow. The more
    </p>
    <p>
     she suffered and seemed to lose hope, the prouder 'and
more unapproachable did she bccome. She held her tme
dak head -\'I rcctly and a'i proudh a, ever and did no:
allow any of us to male the 'llightc\t attempt to approach
and help her.
ThC'IC long weeks of ominom i.ilen&lt;c were perhaps the
most difficult in my life. Here was Gertrude, clo\e to me
yet unapproachable, with no way of reaching her, and
wishing to remain alone: there wa,,'i Brigitte, whose low
for me I knew about and with whom, after avoiding her
for some time, a tolerable relation'ihip had again slow]
been tablished. And amongst m, all there was my old
190
mother, who dw us suffering, who guessed' everything
but did not trust herself to say anything, as I myself
maintained an obstinate silence and felt I could not tell
heranything about my own state. But yorst of all wa\
the horror of being compe1led to look on with th&lt;' help­
less conviction that my bc11t friend11 were heading for
disaster, without my. being able to rc,c.t.J that I knew
    </p>
    <p>
     the reason why.
Gcrtrudc's father M:emccl to \uflcr mo'&gt;t ol .t.11. I h.t.d
known him for years a'I a c lcv&lt;.-r, vil;orou'I, 'lelf pos'le'&gt;-.cd
l'n:ln, hut he had now aged and d1a11gt d; he poJ..&lt;' more
quietly andle.., calmly; he no longer joled and looked
worried and ftliw:rable. I wc·nt to 11c·e him one day in
Novemb&lt;.-r, c.hicfty to hear am new11 and be c.heereda1p
myself rather tllan to c.omfon him
He received me in hi11 \tud,, ga,e me one of hio;
expeu,l\'1! cir,ars and began to tJlk to me in a light,
polite mannu. He did thio. \\ith an l'ffort and pm
abandotled it. He looked at me \\Ith a trouhlecl &lt;imile
and said: "Yon want to lno\\ ho" thin .t.re. don't
you't Ver -uad, my d&lt;"ar friend nu child h.t.'&gt; i.ufku·cl
more than &lt;.· knew, othcr\\i'&gt;c he "&lt;mid h.i,e dealt
with the situation better I am in fa,onr f .i di\011t e
but she will not hear of it. She lme11 him . u lt'd.'&gt;l '&gt;he
11ays so, and Ct '&gt;c h afraid of him. That 10, had. I he
child ii. ill: 11hc d0\e11 her c,e.,, will not li11tt11 to re.t',ID
an more.-, and think'&gt; c, erHhing will be all right if.
    </p>
    <p>
     people will only wait ,md k.t, e hc.·r in pc-ac c-. 'That ii, jrt
ucrvc'&gt;, of cnnr11e, hut ht-r illnc.·.,, 'i&lt;."em'&gt; to he more decph·
rooted. .Jut thinL., i.he l!&gt;Omc.times c.·, en fean that her
husband might ill-treat her if ,he remrno, to him. and ,et
flhe professc11 10 lm,·c him."
191
He did not seem to understand her :thd watched the
c.ourse of events with a feeling of helplessness. To me,
her sufferin were quite conceivably the result of cor.ftict
between love nd pride. Shr was not afraid thar he
would boat her, but that the would no longer respect him,
and while anxiously temporising, she hoped to regain her
staength. She had been able to coPtrol and 1teady him,
but by dojng this had 'K&gt; c'lthau!,ted hcnclf that &amp;he no
longer had c.ouhdencc in her powen; that was her illncs!,.
She longt.-d fo1 him and ,et feared that ,he would lo-re
him complete! if .i frc,h attempt at .i rewndli.ition G"i&lt;l
not pro\ e succe, .. tul. I now ,.1w dearl hm, futile and
11luson my bold r,peculation1 about win.ting her love
hal been.
    </p>
    <p>
     Gertrude loved h&lt;'r hm,h.md .md ,\outtl nc,er care for
anyone else.
Mr. Imthor avoidect tallmg to me about Muoth a, he
knew I W.l!, a fr iencl of hi,, but he h.it&lt;'d him and c.m1lcl
not under&amp;tand how he h.id been able to attract Gertrude
He regarded him a.. a kind of wid,ed 11oucrcr who c.,1p
tured innocent people and ne,&lt;'r rdea"cl tlu·m P.i\\ion
is alwa\\ a m,,ten and unaccountable, and unfm tun,1teh
thllf'e is no douht that life doe&lt;1 not ,p,1re ih pun·,t
ciildren .ind often it i, jmt the mo,t dl"lel\ in people
who cannot help lming tho,e who de!ttro, tht·m
During thi" troubled !tlatc of aff.tir,, I rc&lt;chccl .1 \hort
lctta from Muoth, which relieved the ten1tion He "rote·
"ll&gt;ear Kuhn, Your oprra will now he perform&lt;'d c,en­
where, perhaps better than hero. Howc,er, I 11houlrl
be very glad if OU would c.ome clown ag.tm, ,c1, Ill'"
week, when I ,ing the role in ,our opera twire. You
knoW"'" that ffl wife i&lt;, ill and I am here alone You
191
could thus stay with me without standing on ceremony.
    </p>
    <p>
     Kind regards. Muoth."
He wrote so few letters and never any unneces11ary
oncl, that I immediately.tlecided to go . .He must need
me. For a moment I thouglit of telling Gertrude.Perhaps
this was an opportunity to break down the barrier.
Perhaps she would g,ve me a letter to take to him, or
pass on a kind message, a11k him to come OV'-1", or even
come with me. It was ju\t an idea, but I did not carry
it opt. I only visited her father before departing.
ft was late autumn; the weather wa., wretched, wet
and stormy. From Munich one could at times 11cc for an
hour the neaJ1&gt;y mountains, which were covered with
fresh snow. The town wao, gloom, and wet with.din.
I travelled iun8ediatcl to Muoth's home. Ef-crthing
there was the same as it had been the prcviou ,·ear, the
1,ame nant. the 1,ame rooms and thf! same arrangement of
furniture, hue I he place looked uninhabited and crq,pn;
it also la·kcd the flower-. which Gertrude had always
arranged. M11th w-s not in. The sen·am took me to  my room a,,,t helped rne to unpack. I changed mv
&lt; lothes, and a11 my ho11t had not Ct arri\'ed, I went down
    </p>
    <p>
     into the music-room, where I could ht'ar the wee1, rustlfhg
behind the window and had time to think about the
past. The longer J sat there looking at the pictures and
tuming the leaves of books, the sadder I became, as if
this houM."hold was beyond hclp. I sat down impatiently.
by the piano in order to rid m,·self or these unprofitabll­
thoughts, and J played the Wt'dJing prelude 1\'hich I had
composed, as if by doing so I could bring back the
happiness of the past.
At last I beard qukk, hcav,· footsteps close bf and
G
Heinrich Muoth came in. He held 06.t hii hand and
looked at me wearily.
"Excuie me for being late," he said, "I was bwy at
the theatre. \i.&gt;u know that.I_ am singing this evemng.
Shall we eat now?"
I followed him out of the room. I found him changed:
he was absent-minded and apathetic. He only talked
about the, theatre and seemed unwilling to discuss any­
thing else. Ollly after the meal. when we sat facing each
    </p>
    <p>
     other in the yellow cane chairs, did he say unexpecte4Jy:
"It was very good of you to C'ome. I will makt' a speeiai
effort this evening."
"Thank you," I said. "You don't look well."
#'on't I? Well-we shall 1oon C'hecr up. 1 am a grass-
widower!' YQu know that, don't you?" ,.
"Yes."
He looked away. ·
",tlave you any news about Gertrude?"
"Nothing special.. She is still in a nervous state and
does not sleep well---"
"Oh well, let us not talk about it. She i'I in good hands."
He stood up and walked about the room. I fell that
he still wattcd · to say something. He looked at me
keenly and, I thought, distrustfully.
Then he laughed and left it unsaid. ,
''Lottie ha,; turned up ag-c1.in," he said, changing the
subject.
"Lottie?"
"Yes, Lottie who once c.ime to see you and told you a
    </p>
    <p>
     tale about me. She has married someone here, and it
appean that she still takes an interest in me. She came
to vi:.i.t me here."
194
He looked. at me again slyly and laughed ldien he saw
that I was shocked.
"1'id you· receive her I'" I asked with 'IQme he,1 t.ltion
"6h, you thinL. I clm.capa.ble of 1t'  No, my dear
fellow, I had her r.ent awcly  But forgne me, I m1 talkmg
non1»ense. I c1m .a terribly urcd, clod I hc1ve to ,mg th1c,
evcnlng If 'OU don' rnmd, I wall go and he down for
an hour clod try to ,kep "
"C.ert,unly, Hemnc.h, h.nc a good re!l.t I di go up
to ,Pwn for cl whale Wall ,ou 01dc1 a cclb for me
f could not ,u m th1, houc,e m ,tlcnce c1gc1m and hiiten
to the wmd 1n the uu., I trc1\cllt.-d up to to\\n \\lthout
,lllV clllll, c1nd \O,md&lt;.rcd mto tht. old Art Gallt.n I looL.td  dt the p1ctmc, there tor half ctn hour 111 tl1&lt; poor J1g1lt
I hen It wc1c, ume to &lt;.lmt ,rnd I could thmL. of notlung
heuc..r In ,1,, than read nt.\\'&gt;papcr, m ,1 caft. c1nd look  thro..agh the l,1r,r· Yt1ndm1. panc..c, on to tht. \\Cl road I
re-.c:,hul that I \\otild hrcal throuJh thh hc1rr1qr o
    </p>
    <p>
     c..oolnt...,., c1t .tn co,t and tc1ll opcnh to Hunrach
n&amp;tt "'hen I Cl 111ul, I found hnn ,rn1lmg ,md m a
good humour
"I onl needed a good c,lcep,' he said cheerfulh "I
feel qmte rcuu:d now \ ou mu,t pla !I.Qlllethmg fo1
lllt. I I ht prelude, ,r ,ou "'111 he llO good ..
Plca,c..d .md ,uJiPn-.cd to \Cl ,m h 1 ,;udden change m
ham, I dul a" he w1c,hed \\. hen I had hm'lhed plaung,
he heg.m to tall .._., he ud to, irom&lt;cllh .md ,omewhat
c,ccprualh He let h1" 1man.1uon run raot ,and corfl
pktth \\on m" heatt ,1c1111 I thought of the t&gt;arh daH
of our nend,h1p, ,md \\hen \\t. ktt the hou-,e m the
c,cmng, I looked .1round 1m ,h111t.111h and -.atrl Don't
ou lecp a dng no\\
"No-Gertrude did not like dogs."
W tri\velled to the theatre in silence. I greeted the
conductor and was shown to a scat. I again heard. the
well-known mtasic, but ever'rhing was different from
the last time. I sat alone in my box, Gertrude was absent,
and the inan who acted and sang down there was also
    </p>
    <p>
     changed. He sang with fervour an.t passion. The public
seemed to, li\e him in this role and followed it with
enthusiasm from the beginning. But to me his fervour.
seemed excessive and his voice too loud, almost forced.
During the first interval I went down to  him. \le
was back. in his dressing-room drinking cba&amp;pagne, and
on exc.hanging a few words with him I saw that his ees
we're ... msteady, like those of a drunken igan.
Afterw9ards, while Muoth was changing, I went to see
the conductor.  "Tell me," I asked, "is Muoth ill? It seemed to me
thathe k.ept himself going with champagne. You know
that he is a friend of mine, don't you?"
He looked at me in despair.
"I don't know if he is ill, but it is quite evident that
he is ruining himself. He has sometimes c.ome on to the
st:ge almosl!'drunk, and if he ever misses having a drink,
he acts and sings badly. He always used to have a glass
of champagne before appearing, 4tn 110w he never has
less than a whole bottle. If OU want to give him some
advice-but there is littlt" OU c.an do. Muoth is
    </p>
    <p>
     c:ff:Jiberately ruining himseH."
Muoth came for me and we went to 'the nearest inn
for supper. He was languid and taciturn again as he
had been at lunc.h-tirne, drank large quantities of dark
port t.ine, or otherwi'le he cc,uld not sleep, and looked
196
as if he wante4 to forget at any price that-there were
other things in the world apart &amp;om his fatigue and
desire for &amp;leep.
8n the way back in the cab J;ae revived for a moment,
laughed and said: "Mf'-iend, if I am not t'1ere, you
can pickle your opera; no-one else but rne could sing
that part,"
The following morning he rose late and was still tired
and listless, with unsteady eyes and an ashen tace. Ater
he had had his breakfast I took him aside and had a talk
wkh him.
"You are.killing ,·ourself," I said both anxiously and
crossly. "You.revi\'e yount'lf with &lt;.hampagne and after ...
wards you aaturally have to pay for it. I can imal'.lne
    </p>
    <p>
     why you are d'9ing it, and I would not say au·tl:ftng if
you did not havf' a wife.-. You owe it to her to be rep«t­
able and :..ourag&lt;'ous, outwardly a11d inwardly."
"Really!" He smiled weakly, evidently amused by m·
Yehemence. · "And what does ,ihe owe nu·? Does ,ih art
courageously? SJ,-: ,;;tavs with her father and lea,f'o, me
all alone. Why hould I pull ffi'lelf togcthc-r when she
doesn't? People alread know that there is nothing
betw&lt;.'en us any longer, and ,·ou know it, too, but i'1st
the amc I'hil\l' to ,;ing and entertain pcop. I can't do
it with the £ccling of empLine'is and disst which I have
about everything. particularly about art."
"All the same, OU mu'lt turn O\'er a n&lt;.'w leaf, Muoth !
It is not as if drinking made OU happ, ! You a,e
absolutely wretrhed ! If singing i'I too much for you at
the moment, ask for lea,·e of abscnre; vou would obtain
it immediately. You are not iicpendt'nt on the mone'
which you earn by singing. Go into the mountaws, or
197
to the sea, or wherever you like and get \f.rell again J And
    </p>
    <p>
     give up that stupid drinking! It is not only stupid, it is
oowaidly: You know that quite well."
He smiled ai that. "Oh yq," he said coolly. "Yoh go
and dance a walb some timtr It would do you good,
believe me I Don't always he thinking about your stupid
leg. That is just imagination!"
"Stop it!" I cried angTih, "you know quite well that
that is ditferem. I would very much like to dance if J
could, but I cant. But you can quite well pull youtself
together and behave more sensib]. You must definil\:]y
gi,·e up drinking!·
"Defmilely! My dear Kuhn, vou mako me laugh. lr
it iust as difficult for me to alter and give 'up drinking
as it "is fnr you to dance. I must din1{ to the things
that still keep up mv spirib. Do yon understand? People
who drink arc con\"ert.!d when the fmd something in the
Salvation Arm or elsewhere that gives them more 'latih­
faction and is more enduring. There was ome something
like that for me, namel\" women, but I &lt;.an no lon""'r . ,i:,-
take an interest in an other woman sim e she h,1., been
    </p>
    <p>
     mine and has now forsaken me, 110-__ ..
She has not forsaken ,ou ! She \\ill c.omc hacL .. She
is only ill.'' 91
"That is what -ou think and that is what she think\ . . herself, I know, but 11hc will not come hack. \Vhen a
ship is going to sink, the rats abandon it beforehand.
qhviously, they do no know that the 11hip i11 going under;
the" only have an unplea11ant 11ensation ·and run awa,,
no doubt with the intention of soon returning."
"Oh, don't talk like that! You have often despaired in
your life and yet things have turned out all right again."
198
.. True I That'is becau11e I have found some·consol.tion
or narcotic. Sometimes it has been a woman, sometimes
a geod friend-yes, you are al!oO induded-at o'thef tim&amp;'I
it llas been mu1tic or apf\;lu6e in the thfatre. But now
thc-11e things no longer gn'e me pl&lt;-ac,ufe and that i,; whv
I drink. I &lt;.'Ould never c,ing wirhout hro,t having a couple
of drinJ...1,, hut now I &lt;.an al110 not think, talk, lh.e and
ft.d tolerably well without hnt having a couP,le of drinks.
An,way, you mu,., 1,top leuuring m&lt;·, whattve you think.
    </p>
    <p>
     The same situation om e aro-.e before, about twelve ,can . .
a,rt&gt;. Someone le&lt;.tured me then al1,0 and did not let me
alone. It wa.11 about .t girl, and h a rninc.idence it wai.
m hest frieml----"
"And tht.'h i'"
"Then I waf obliged to throw him out. A,tM" that I
did nut h _ ,. a friend frn a long time. a'I J. matter of
fa&lt; t, not until \ul' &lt;.amr alon."
"That is l'\·idcnt."
"l1, it?" he i.aid mildh "Well, mu ha,·e. the cf.oice::.
But I will i..l\ If ,1 , would he o;orn if ,ou left me in the  lnnh juoi;t now. 1 am a11.1.d1t·d to ,ou, and I h.l\e aloi;o
thought of som&lt;'lhing to ghe ,on plta'lurt. ·
"ll,1,e ,ou :-What i, it?"
"l.io;tcn: \'ou ,lre fomlof m, wife, or at1eac,t OU U'K'd
10 b', and I am al'lo fond of her, ,en much -.o. :Sow. let  u" ha,c a celebration tonight. juo;t ,ou and me, in her
honour. There i, a ,pt·d.il rt,1,011 for it. I ha,e had a
porn .lit ,,£ hc1 painted; i.hc had to viiii t the arilist
frt·q\u·nth· earlit·r in tht ,ear and I often \\ent with her.
The portrait wai,. almost re.uh \\hen she went awa\'.
The arti"t want&lt;'d her to 1,i1 &lt;hlH' more. hut I ew tired
    </p>
    <p>
     of waiting and ordered the portr.lit to he delher-1. as it
19,
is. 'Chat waa a week ago, and now it&amp;is framed and
arrived here yesterday. I should have shown it to you at
opce, but 'it would be better to have a celebration about
it. Indeed, it yould not be piuch good without a tew
glasses oi champagne. How cbld I enjoy it otherwise
Do you agree?"
I sensed the emotion and even /he tears behind his
joking manner, and I cheerfully agreed, although I was
not really iri tt1e mood for it.
We made preparations for the celebration in honpur
of the woman who seemed so rompletely lost to him, 'as
she was in fact to me.
"Can you remember which Rowers she lik?" he asked
me,. .. I don't know anything about flowers tit what th&lt;',
are caTied .. She always had some white ahd yellow ones,
,and also some red ones. Do you know what they are?"
"Yes, I know some of them. Why?"
"You must buy some. Order a cab. I must go up to
    </p>
    <p>
     town' in any case. \Ve shall act as if she were here."
He thought of many other things which made pc
realise how deeply and incessantly he had thought about
Gertrude. It made me both happy and l!it1d to observe
thi. Because of her: he no longer kept a dog and lived
alone, he. wh i&gt;reviously could never be without women
for long. He had had a portrait of her p:ainted. He a'iked
me to buy the flowcr1 that she liked. It was as if he had
taken off a ma'ik and I saw a child'1 face behind the
hlV"d, selfish features.
"But," I objected, "we ought to look ht the portrait
now, or in the afternoon. It is always better to look at
pictures by daylight."
.. Do,-a it matter? You can look at it again tomorrow.
100
I hope it is a good painting, but in truth._' it is not so
important; we just want to look at her."
After a rn_eal we travelled up to town and m.acfe soe
putchases, first of all of flqJVers, a large bynch of chrysan-. . themums, a basket of roses and two bunchcsof white
lilac. He also had the sudden idea of having a large
    </p>
    <p>
     quantity of flowers 1Cnt to Gertrude in R.
"There is something lovely about flow," he said
thoughtfully. I can understand Gertrude9being fond of
tfifim· I like them too, but I cannot take the trouble to
ldbk after anything like that. When there was no woman
to attend o them, they always seemed to me to be
uncared for nd did not really gh·e me pleasure."
In the ing I found that the new portraitad
been placed iJ the music-room and was covesed \rith a
silk clot" We had had an excellent" meal, after which
Muot fint wishc tl to hear the ddding prelude. When
I had playnf. it, he unco,·crcd the portrait and we.stood
facing it for a while in silence. Gertrude had b"een
paJnted full-le :th in a light summer drc'll:1, and her
bright eyes loor..ed a&lt;.ross at m trustfully from the por­
trait. It was some time before we nmld look at each
other and tak&lt;" each othets hand'i. Hcich filled 4'wo
gl.asses with Rhmc wmewed to the Ifl&gt;rtrau, and we
drank to the woizian about whom we were both thinking.
Thtn he carefully picked up the picture and carried it out.
    </p>
    <p>
     I asked him to sing something, hut he did not wish to.
"Do you remember," he said smiling, "how \\'e spent
an evening together before m· wedding? Now I am a
ba,·hclor once mo,re ,md we shail again try to cheer
oursclve-s up with a couple of drinks and havt' a little
pleasure. Your fri«-nd Teiser ought to be here; hnow'i
201
how 'lo make merry better than you and r. Give him my
regards when OU are back home. He can't bear n1e, but
,ju,t thl: same ---"
With the ste-1dily maintainq:l c.heerfulness which ltad
always been a &lt;.haracteristic or fiis best hours, he began
to chat and to remind me of things that had taken place
in the past, and I was 1.urprised at I\Pw much he remem­
bered. Evey casual little things which I thought he had
long forgotten! had remained in his memory. He had
also not forgotten the very first evening which I l1ad
spent at his lmuSf', together with Marian and Kralf,l
and the Wa we had quarrelled. Onh· about Gertrude
d:-1 he remain silent. He did not mention the period
    </p>
    <p>
     in 11hich she had come into our live'I and I 'fill glad that
he did" no, do so.
I felt plea&lt;,cd about thi" unexpected cnjo,ablc even­
ing and let him help t.im'l&lt;'lf lih&lt;·ralh to the good wint·
without admoni\hing him. I L.ncw how rare the!.e mood'I  were with him, and how he chcririhed and clung to
them when the\ occa'lionalh came, and they ne\"er Jicl  come without the aid of wine. I alM&gt; knew that thi'I
mood would not last long and that tomorrow he would
again be irritable and unapproachable. Ncvertheles\, it   gave me a feetrng of well-bemg and almmt cheerfulnec,s
to listen to hi" &lt;.lever. thoughtful. although perhap'I
contradictor\" observatiom While tailing, he occa'lion
ally directed one of his attractive glances at me. which
ha.only did in such hours a\ the\e, and the, were lile the
glance, of one who had jmt aw.1kened from a dream.
At one time. when he wa .. '&gt;ilent a,nd 'lat thinking, I
began to tell him what m, tht·o.,ophi'&gt;t friend had told
me ab-.ut th,. 1.icknei.s of lonel people.
202
"Oh," lie sa!d good-humouredly, "and I suppose you
believed him. You should have become a theologian."
'ilWhy eh&gt; OU ,ay that? Aftes all, there may he some
    </p>
    <p>
     thing in it."
"Oh, of cour11c. Wise m&lt;'n continually detnom,trate
from time to time that everything is only imagination.
Do·you know, I oftep u\ed to rt&gt;ad such book,; in the pa,;t
and I can tell you that they are of no me, Qf absolutely
no uo,e. All that the'.le philosopherllJ writt&gt;a.tbout is on] a
p:a,p1e; perhap'.I thcv comfort themsche,; with it. One
philOM&gt;pher prea&lt; he., individualism betam,e he &lt;.an't bear
his ,ontemporaric .. , and another sodalii,m became he..,
c.an't endurc,,being alone. It may be that our feelinr'8f
lonelines!I  illness, hut one can"t do .mvthin'l a6out
it. Sonmaml;!Ji,m i, al'.lo an illne'o'i, and that is wh a
fellow !111:, .. ;,1,r from it does in fact :rand at the edge of
a roof, ,md whL·r "omeont:" c-all-. ut 10 him, he falls and
hrcal,.., hi!I, nee J..."
... I hat i,; quite different.'"
"M,nbc, I w 1't .,a, I am right. I onh mc,m that one
do&lt;'.,n't get amwhcr&lt;' with wi-.dom. ·1 hc·r&lt;· are on] tYto
J..indo, of wi'Jdom; all the rc!lt i!ii ju..t idle talk.''
"\\'hi&lt;.h t\\o L.ind., uf 7dom do ,ou mean?"
    </p>
    <p>
     "\\'ell, either the wftfld i-. bad ,11./f wortble.,!ii, a,;
Bmldbio,b and .hristiam prc.1c.h, in \\hi&lt;.h case oue must  do pc·nance .md 1enouncc eHrHhing-1 belie,e one ran
obtain pe,uc of mind in thi., \\a, -ai,cetio do not have
c,mh a hard lik ,t!ii people· thin!... Or cl.,, the \\orld and
life ic, good :mtl r iht-thtn one can just tale part in it
and afterwardi. di pc,uefu]h·, because it ii. hni11hed--"
"Wh.1t do ,ou bt"lieve in uunclf?"
"It i., no use a!lking that. Most pt&gt;op]e helie\'e ia both.
203
depehdent on the weather, their health, and whether
they have money in their purses or not. And those who
.reai.lly l&gt;elieve, do not live in accordance with their beli-..--£11.
That is bow it ;., with me, too.., For il,stance, I believe as
Buddha did, that \ife is not worth while, but I live for
things thin appeal to my senses as if this is the most
important thing to do. If only it .. more satisfying I "
It was nrt yet late when we finished. As we went
through the adjoining room, where only a single electric
light was burning, Muoth took. my arm and stopped spe.
switched on all the lights and removed the c.over froln
    </p>
    <p>
     Gcrtrude's portrait which stood there. We lsok.ed once
It. -.re at her dear, sweet face; then he placred the cover
ovthe picture again and switched out tf,,!'lights. He
came th,-ne to my room and put a couple of magazines
on the table in case I should want to read. Then he took
ID' hand and said quiey: "Good night, my dear ft"llow!"
I went to bed and lav awake for .tbout half an hour
thinking about him. Ir had mo,,ed me and made me feel
ashamed to hear how faithfulh· he rt"memht&gt;red all the r
small events of our friendship. He, who found it diffirnlt
to extend friendship, clung to rho,;e he cart&gt;d for more
ferntly tha I had thought
After that I t\11 a'lleep aml ha confused dn·am'I atxmt
Muoth, my opera and Mr. Lohe. When, I awoke, it wa,
still night. I had been awakened by a fright whi&lt;.h had
nothing to do wi1h m· dreams. I saw th&lt;.' dull grey of
ap,roaching dawn outlined again'lt the window, and h.td
a feeling of deep angui!lh. I sat up in bC&lt;'l and tried to
shake off M' sleep and to think clearly.
Then there were heavy rapid knock11 on mv door. I
    </p>
    <p>
     sprang1,ut of bed and opened it. It was cold and I had
104
not yet switched on the light. The servant sf&gt;Od outside,
xantily dressed, and stared at me anxiously with eves
ful! of terror.
''Will you plea"se cgrae?" · he hi!rf&gt;Cred, panting.
"There has been an acc.ident."
I put on a dressing-gown and followed the young man
down the stairs. H opened a door, stood bac.k and let
me enter. In the room there wa"I as.mall caQS: table with
a candelabrium on it, in whic.h three thiA candles were
b.lU'ning. By the side of the table there wa11 a di.sord&lt;.-red
b!d, and inside it, lying on his face, was my friend
Heinrich 1'1uoth.
"We mustturn him round," I 11aid softl··
The ser'\ did not tru11t himself to do it.
"I will fctc.ti a doctor imruediatcl·," he !laic "ltammer­
ing.
But J cumpelk&lt;l him to pull tthnllelf togcth&lt;.T and we
turned the·recumbent man o\'er. I looked at my frj.end's
    </p>
    <p>
     face, which was white a11d drawn. His s.hirt ·wa'i co\'ered
wh hlood ar";. when W&lt;' put him down and co,·ert.-d
him up again, hill mouth twitched slightly and his eyes
c.ould no longer see.
The wtvant then bcgag,to tell me ex,!5sdlv what ihad
happcrml hut I did notant to know .fr1'·thing. When
the doctor .irried, Muoth wa'i alrc.idy dead. In the
morning I 11ent a telegram to Jmthor. Then I returned
to the 11ilent house. sat by the dead man'!-bed, listened
to the wind in the trees outside, and only then reali.ed
how fond I had been of thi, unfor run.ite man. I could
not mourn for hiy1; his dtath had been easier than his
life.
In the evening I stood at the railwa·-station dd saw
205
old Mr. lmbor step out of the train, followed by a taU
woman dressed in black. I took them back with me to'
tl1I"! dead man, who ha&lt;' now been dressed and plat-ed
on his bier aDJOngst the flowers of 'the previous day.
Gertrude 'stooped and ki hH pale lips.
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter nine
    </head>
    <p>
     When we stood beside hi grave, I saw .i t.111, attra&lt;.tive
woman Mth a tear-st.aiued face. wJ.io held ro,e in her
hand and sJ"&gt;Od alone, and when I looked aero\&amp; .it her
curioush, I sa\\r that it was Lottie. She nodded to me
and i.m.iled. But Gertrude had not wept; she looktd
str.iight .ihead o hl"r, attentleh and te.idfastly, in tile
light r.iin \&lt;.altered .ibout b the wind, and lfeld heiYlf
'h: a ,oung tree uppoued h, fmn root-.· But it WJ.'&gt;
onl\ slf-restraint, .ind two dJ.\o, l.iter, ,·1 he wc1-.
unpacl...mgl"l\luoth' flower., which had me.antirne .1rri\ed
at her houo,c, '&gt;he hrnl...e do\\11, .ind we dul not o,ee hl'I
tor a long tame
1o6





My grief, too, only cam&lt;' to the fore later and, il'i is al way.,
the case, I thought of numerou'i in.,tance, when I had
    </p>
    <p>
     bren unjust to mv dead friend. Well, he had inflicted the
I
w"1st thin upon him.,clf, and 1101 onl hi death. I
mt.-ditated liar a long tinu-ahout the'ic· thinq-., and &lt;.ould
not find an&amp;hing vague or in&lt;.omprehc·mible Jbout h;.
fat&lt;', and t"l VJ" all horrible and a mr&gt;&lt;.kt&gt;n. It wae .10
different with 1al own life, .md wiLh Gertrude\ .intl th,u
of 111.111\ Jl!!.rs. J.1te wa, not l..md, life wa., &lt;apric.iou'J
.md terrible, and then· \\.t\ 110 go&lt; 01 rea,on in nature.
nut there is good and re.non in m, m human being.,,
with whom fortune pla\'i, .111d \\c un be iitl'onger 'than
naiurc and fat i onh for .i lew hoUJ,. And we un
,haw close to one another in time, of need, understand
and love one ,mother, and live to comfort each other.
And iiometimeii, when tll_f blac.k depths arc o,ilent,.we
ran do even more. \Ve .61 then be gocAor momenh,
stretch out .a wmmanding hand and ocate thing!» "·hich  were not there before and which, when the .ire created,
&lt;ontinue to live without u,. Out of sounds, wordii and
other frail and worthle.,, thin. we can &lt;.0mtruct intell«­
tual and lrical tmii, we un, re.ite philoo,ophie11 and song!,
    </p>
    <p>
     full of meaning and comfort, more beautiful .ind enduring
than the grim sport of fortune .1.nd dcstin. We can
keep the 'ipirit o God in our he.irt'i and, .it time'iwhen
to";
we e ful\ of Him, He can appear in our eyes and our
words, and also talk to others who do not know or do not
1'ish t9 know Him. We r.annot evade life's roune, but.we
can school our,el :es to be sugerior tI fortune and also to
look unlinchingly upon the most painful things.
So, during the "ears that have passed since Heinrich
Muoth's death, I have brought him,.to life again a thbus­
and times,,.and have been able to talk to him mort"
wisely and afiectionately than I did when he was alive.
And as time passed, my old mother died, and also prftty
Brigitte Teiser who, after years of waiting and givi:bg
the wound time to heal, married a mu"liciau, .ind did not
,dive her first confmement.
vei-trudc had overcome the pain s.ad suffered
when'"shc;. received our flowers as a grcting and plea
from the dead. I do not often speak to her about it
    </p>
    <p>
     although I see her t've .. y day, but I belit&gt;ve that she looks
back on the pring-timc of her life as on a distant valley
seen ·during a journey· a long time ago, and not as on a
lost garden of Eden. She has regained her strength and
serenity and al sings again, but since that cold kiss on
the dead man·"I lip. she hai. never kisSt"d another man.
Ovce or twi&lt;.t', during the c1rse of the years, when ht&gt;r
wound healcll, and hc.T beinjf :-adiatcd the old charm,
my thoughts travelled along the old forbidden paths and
I asked myself: why not? But inwardly I alrcadv knew
the answer, and that no change could be made in our
ro1ationship towards each other. She is my friend, and
after lonely, restless periods, when I t"inerge from my
silence with a song or a ronata, it belongs, fint and fore­
most to us both. Muoth was right. On growing old, ont'
becor :s 111.-.re contented than in one's youth, whkh I
will not therefore revile, for in all my df'eams I hear my
yout  like a wonderful song, wt&gt;ich now sounds even
sweeter and more harmonious than it did in reality .
.108
    </p>
    <p>
    </p>
   </div>
  </body>
 </text>
</TEI>
