<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TEI>
 <teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
   <titleStmt>
    <title>
     In Sight of Chaos
    </title>
    <author>
     Hermann Hesse
    </author>
    <year>
     1920
    </year>
    <genre>
     Fiction
    </genre>
    <originalrlanguage>
     German
    </originalrlanguage>
    <source>
     https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=ucbk.ark:/28722/h21j97t9c=1
    </source>
    <originalfileformat>
     Plain text
    </originalfileformat>
   </titleStmt>
  </fileDesc>
 </teiHeader>
 <text>
  <body>
   <p>
    IT APPEARS TO ME THAT WHAT I call the Downfall of Europe is foretold and explained with extreme clearness in Dostoevsky's works and in the most concentrated form in "The Brothers Karamazoff” .
   </p>
   <p>
    It seems to me that European and espe- cially German youth are destined to find their greatest writer in Dostoevsky - not in Goethe, not even in Nietzsche. In
   </p>
   <p>
    the most modern poetry, there is every- where an approach to Dostoevsky, even though it is sometimes callow and imi- tative . The ideal of the Karamazoff, primeval, Asiatic and occult, is already beginning to consume the European soul. That is what I mean by the downfall of Europe. This downfall is a return home to the mother, a turning back to Asia, to the source , to the "Faustischen Müt- tern" and will necessarily lead , like every
   </p>
   <p>
    death on earth , to a new birth . 14
   </p>
   <p>
    We contemporaries see a " downfall ” in these events in the same way as the aged
   </p>
   <p>
    who, compelled to leave the home they love , mourn a loss to them irreparable while the young think only of the future, care only for what is new. What is that Asiatic Ideal that I find in
   </p>
   <p>
    Dostoevsky, the effect of which will be,
   </p>
   <p>
    as I see it , to overwhelm Europe ? Briefly, it is the rejection of every strong- ly-held Ethic and Moral in favour of a comprehensive LAISSEZ - FAIRE . This is the new and dangerous faith , that Elder Zossima announced, the faith lived by Alyosha and Dmitri, a faith which was
   </p>
   <p>
    brought into clearer expression by Ivan Karamazoff. In the case ofElder Zossima,
   </p>
   <p>
    the ideal Right still reigns supreme. Good and Evil always exist for him ; but he bestows his love on evil - doers from
   </p>
   <p>
    choice. Alyosha already makes some- thing far more vital of this new creed, taking his way through filth and slime 15
   </p>
   <p>
    with an almost amoral impartiality. He reminds us of Zarathustra's vow : "In that day I vowed that I would "renounce every aversion . " But Alyosha's brothers carrythis further, they take this road with greater decision ; they seem often to do so defiantly . In the voluminous book it sometimes ap-
   </p>
   <p>
    pears as though the relationship of the Brothers Karamazoff unfolded itself too
   </p>
   <p>
    slowly so that what at one time seems stable, at another becomes solvent. The
   </p>
   <p>
    saintly Alyosha becomes ever more worldly, the worldly brothers more saintly and similarly the most unprin- cipled and unbridled of them becomes the saintliest, the most sensitive , the
   </p>
   <p>
    most spiritual prophet of a new holi- ness , of a new morality, of a new man- kind . That is very curious. The more the tale unfolds itself, the wickeder and the more drunken , the more licentious and brutal the Karamazoffs , the more 16
   </p>
   <p>
    brightly the new Ideal glows through the corpus of these raw appearances , people and acts and the more spiritual, the saintlier they inwardly become . Com- pared with the drunken, murdering , vio- lent Dmitri and the cynical intellectual Ivan - the decent , highly respectable
   </p>
   <p>
    magistrate and the other representatives of the bourgeois , triumph though they may outwardly, are shabby , hollow, worthless.
   </p>
   <p>
    It seems , then , that the "New Ideal " by which the roots of the European spirit is being sapped is an entirely amoral concept, a faculty to feel the Godlike, the significant, the fatalistic in thewicked-
   </p>
   <p>
    est and in the ugliest and even to accord them veneration and worship . No less than that. The ironical exaggeration with
   </p>
   <p>
    which the Magistrate in his speech seeks to hold these Karamazoffs up to the scorn of the citizens , is not in reality an exag- 17
   </p>
   <p>
    geration. It is indeed a tame indictment.
   </p>
   <p>
    For in this speech the "Russian man " is exhibited from the conservative - bour- geois point of view. He had been till
   </p>
   <p>
    then a cock-shy. Dangerous , emotional, irresponsible , yet conscience - haunted ; soft, dreamy, cruel, yet fundamentally childish. As such one still likes to regard the "Russian man" to - day, although , I
   </p>
   <p>
    believe , he has for a long time been on the road to becoming the European man. And this is the Downfall of Europe.
   </p>
   <p>
    Let us look at this "Russian man" a mo-
   </p>
   <p>
    ment. He is far older than Dostoevsky, but Dostoevsky has finally shown him to the world in all his fearful significance . The "Russian man" is Karamazoff, he is
   </p>
   <p>
    Fyodor Pavlovitch , he is Dmitri , he is Ivan, he is Alyosha. These four, diffe- rent as they may appear, belong insepa- rably together. Together they are Kara- mazoff, together they are the "Russian 18
   </p>
   <p>
    man", together they are the approaching, the proximate man ofthe European crisis. Next notice something very remarkable . Ivan in the course of the story turns from a civilised man into a Karamazoff,
   </p>
   <p>
    from an European into a Russian , out of a definitely - formed historical type into the unformed raw material of Destiny.
   </p>
   <p>
    There is a fairy-like dream-reality about the way in which Ivan slides out of his original psychology : out of his under- standing, coolness , knowledge . There is mystical truth in this sliding of the ap- parently solid brother into the hysteri- cal , into the Russian , into the Karama- zoff-like. It is just he , the doubter, who at the end holds speech with the devil! We will come to that later on. So the "Russian man " is neither drawn
   </p>
   <p>
    as the hysterical, the drunkard , the fe- lon, the poet , the Saint, but as one with them all , as possessing all these charac-
   </p>
   <p>
    teristics simultaneously. The "Russian 19
   </p>
   <p>
    man ”, Karamazoff, is assassin and judge, ruffian and tenderest soul , the complet-
   </p>
   <p>
    est egotist and the most self- sacrificing hero . We shall not get a grasp of him from an European , from a hard and fast moral , ethical , dogmatic standpoint. In this man the outward and the inward, Good and Evil, God and the Satan are united.
   </p>
   <p>
    The urgent appeal ever rings out from these Karamazoffs for the symbol after
   </p>
   <p>
    which their spirit is striving, a God who is also a Devil. Dostoevsky's "Russian man" is penetrated by that symbol . The God-Devil, the primeval Demiurgus , he who was there from the beginning , who alone stands the other side of the forbid-
   </p>
   <p>
    den, who knows neither day nor night, neither good nor evil . He is the No- thingness and the All. He is unknow- able to us , for we have only the power to recognize prohibition , we are indivi- dual beings , bound to day and to night, 20
   </p>
   <p>
    to warm and to cold, we need a God and a devil . On the other side of that
   </p>
   <p>
    which is forbidden , in Nothingness and in The All , only Demiurgus , the God of the Altogether, who knows neither Good nor Evil , can live . There would be much to say about this but what I have written must suffice . We have seen the nature of the "Rus- sian man". He reaches forth beyond pro-
   </p>
   <p>
    hibitions , beyond natural instincts , be- yond morality. He is the man who has grasped the idea of freeing himself and on the other side , beyond the veil , be- yond PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS, of turning back again . This ideal man of the Karamazoffs loves nothing and every-
   </p>
   <p>
    thing, fears nothing and everything , does nothing and everything. He is primeval matter, he is monstrous soul - stuff. He
   </p>
   <p>
    cannot live in this form , he can only go under, he can only pass on. 21
   </p>
   <p>
    Dostoevsky has conjured forth this crea- ture of downfall, this fearful apparition. It has often been said that it is a good thing that his Karamazoffs were not de- veloped to their last stage . Otherwise not only Russia but mankind would have
   </p>
   <p>
    been exploded into the air. But what has been said, though the speak- er has not drawn from his words their
   </p>
   <p>
    ultimate implications , can never be un- said. That which exists , that which has been thought, that which is possible, can never again be extinguished . The "Russian man" has long existed, he exists far outside Russia , he rules half Europe, and part of the dreaded explosion has in- deed in these last years been audibly evident. It shows itself in that Europe
   </p>
   <p>
    is tired, it shows itself in that Europe wants to turn homewards, in that Eu- rope wants rest , in that Europe wants to be recreated , reborn. 22
   </p>
   <p>
    There occur to me two pronouncements of an European who indisputably repre- sents for us an age that is past, an Eu- rope which , if it has not already gone under, is in the balance. I allude to the Kaiser Wilhelm. The one pronounce- ment is that which he once wrote under
   </p>
   <p>
    a somewhat extraordinary allegorical
   </p>
   <p>
    picture. In this he warned the European nations to guard their "holiest posses- sions " against the approaching peril from the East. Kaiser Wilhelm was certainly not a wise
   </p>
   <p>
    or profound person . Yet he possessed, as the repository and guardian of old- world ideals , a certain hereditary insight which warned him against the dangers that threatened those ideals . He was
   </p>
   <p>
    not intellectual , he did not like reading good books and he busied himself too much with politics . Thus , that picture with its warning to the nations was not,
   </p>
   <p>
    as one might think , the result of reading 23
   </p>
   <p>
    Dostoevsky, but of a vague fear of the Eastern hordes, which through Japanese
   </p>
   <p>
    ambitions , might be enrolled against Eu- rope. The Kaiser knew but partially the import of his words and how uncom- monly right he was . He certainly did not know the Karamazoffs , he had a horror of profound thought but he had an uncannily right foreboding. The dan- ger was coming nearer every day. That danger was the Karamazoffs , the conta- gion from the East. What he uncon- sciously but rightly feared was the stag- gering back of the tired European spirit to the Asiatic mother.
   </p>
   <p>
    The second imperial pronouncement which occurred to me and which at that time made an awful impression on me , is this. "That nation will win the war which has the best nerves." When
   </p>
   <p>
    at that time , quite at the beginning of the war, I heard of that pronouncement,
   </p>
   <p>
    it came upon me like the muffled fore- 24
   </p>
   <p>
    warning of an earthquake. It was , of course , clear that the Kaiser did not
   </p>
   <p>
    mean it so , what he really had in his mind was something very flattering to Germany. Very likely he himself had excellent nerves and his hunting and troop - display comrades also . He know, too , the old weary story of effete and degenerate France and of virtuous , pro- lific Germany and believed it. But for
   </p>
   <p>
    those with knowledge , still more for those with the intuition to sense to-
   </p>
   <p>
    morrow and the day after , that pro- nouncement was terrible . For they knew that the Germans had in no way better
   </p>
   <p>
    nerves than the French , English and Americans, at best better than the Rus- sians. For to have bad nerves is the col-
   </p>
   <p>
    loquial term for hysteria and neurasthe- nia , for moral insanity and for all those evils which one may regard in different ways but which collectively signify the Karamazoff. With the exception of Aus- 25
   </p>
   <p>
    tria, Germany stood infinitely more willingly and weakly open to the Kara- mazoffs , to Dostoevsky, to Asia , than any other European people. Thus the Kaiser too has twice uttered
   </p>
   <p>
    a forewarning, has indeed foretold the Downfall of Europe .
   </p>
   <p>
    But quite another question is how we are to regard this Downfall. Here we are at the parting of the ways as we are of the spirit. Those who cling definitely to the past, those who venerate time- honoured cultural forms , the Knights
   </p>
   <p>
    of a treasured morality, must seek to delay this downfall and will mourn it inconsolably when it passes. For them the Downfall is the End ; for the others,
   </p>
   <p>
    it is the Beginning. For the first , Dosto- evsky is a criminal, for the others a Saint. For the one party, Europe and its soul constitute an entity once and for all, foreordained , inviolate , a thing fixed 26
   </p>
   <p>
    and immutable. For the other, it is a be-
   </p>
   <p>
    coming, a mutable, ever- changing thing.
   </p>
   <p>
    The Asiatic, the chaotic , the savage, the dangerous , the amoral , in fact the Karamazoff elements can , like every-
   </p>
   <p>
    thing else in the world , just as well be regarded from a positive as from a ne- gative point of view. Those who , from a fear to which they give no name,
   </p>
   <p>
    curse this Dostoevsky, these Karama- zoffs , these Russians , this Asia, this
   </p>
   <p>
    Demiurge-fantasy and all their implica- tions , have a hard time before them. For Karamazoff dominates more and more.
   </p>
   <p>
    But they fall into error by only seeing the obvious , the visible , the material. They see the Downfall ofEurope coming as a horrible catastrophe with thunder and beating of drums , either as Revolu- tion accompanied by slaughter and vio- lence , or as the triumph of crime , lust, cruelty, corruption and murder. 27
   </p>
   <p>
    All that is possible , all of it is contained in Karamazoff. One never knows what
   </p>
   <p>
    a Karamazoff is going to do next. Per- haps he will surprise us with a death- blow, perhaps with a moving thanksgiv- ing to God. He consists of Alyoshas and ofDmitris , of Fyodors and of Ivans. As we have seen , they are not to be identified with any single character but with a readiness to adopt any and every character.
   </p>
   <p>
    But there is no solace for the apprehen- sive, in that these incalculable people may just as well bring about a good as an evil future , that they are just as like- ly to found a new Kingdom of God as one of Satan. What stands or falls on earth concerns the Karamazoffs little .
   </p>
   <p>
    Their secret lies elsewhere, and the va- lue and fruitfulness of their amoral na- ture also .
   </p>
   <p>
    These new people differ fundamentally 28
   </p>
   <p>
    from the earlier ones , the orderly, law- abiding, decent folk, in one vital respect, namely, that they live inwardly just as much as outwardly , that they are con- stantly concerned with their own souls. The Karamazoffs are prepared to com-
   </p>
   <p>
    mit any crime , but they only commit them exceptionally because , as a rule , it suffices for them to have thought of
   </p>
   <p>
    crime or to have dreamt of it , to have made their soul a confidant of its possi-
   </p>
   <p>
    bility. Here lies their secret. Let us seek a formula for it.
   </p>
   <p>
    Every formation of humanity , every cul- ture , every civilisation , every order, is based upon an endowment of something over and above that which is allowed
   </p>
   <p>
    and that which is forbidden. Man , half- way between animal and a higher con- sciousness , has always a great deal with- in him to repress , to hide , to deny, in order to be a decent human being and to be socially possible . Man is full of 29
   </p>
   <p>
    animal , full of primeval being, full of the tremendous, scarcely tamed instincts of a beastly, cruel selfishness. All these.
   </p>
   <p>
    dangerous instincts are there , always. But culture , super - consciousness , civi- lisation , have covered them over. Man does not show them, he has learnt from childhood to hide these instincts and to
   </p>
   <p>
    deny them . But every one of these in- stincts must come sooner or later to the
   </p>
   <p>
    surface . Each instinct goes on living,
   </p>
   <p>
    not one is killed , not one is permanently and for ever changed and ennobled. And each of these instincts is in itself good, is not worse than another. But for every
   </p>
   <p>
    period and culture there is a particu- lar instinct which it regards with special aversion or horror. Now when these in-
   </p>
   <p>
    stincts are again aroused , in the form of unextinguished and merely superficially though carefully restrained nature for- ces , when these beasts again begin roar- ing like slaves whose spirit, long crushed 30
   </p>
   <p>
    by flogging and repression , is rekindled by insurgence , then the Karamazoffs are upon us. When a culture , one of these
   </p>
   <p>
    attempts to domesticate man , gets tired and begins to decay, then men become in greater measure remarkable. They be- come hysterical , develope strange lusts, become like young people in puberty or like women in child -birth . Longings for which man has no name , arise in the soul ; longings which the old culture and
   </p>
   <p>
    morality must hold for wrong. But they announce themselves with so innocent
   </p>
   <p>
    a voice , that Good and Evil become in-
   </p>
   <p>
    terchangeable and every law reels. Such people are the Brothers Karama- zoff. Every law easily appears to them as a convention , every morality as phi- listine ; they lightly adopt every licence, every caprice. With ever so great a glad- ness they listen to the many voices in their own hearts. But these souls need not inevitably reap 3I
   </p>
   <p>
    crime and turbulence from Chaos . As a
   </p>
   <p>
    new direction is given to the interrup- ted primeval current, so the seed is sowed of a new order, of a new morality. With every culture it is the same . We cannot destroy the primeval current, the animal in us , for with its death we should die ourselves. But we can to a
   </p>
   <p>
    certain extent guide it, to a certain ex- tent we can calm it down , to a certain extent make the "Good" serviceable , as
   </p>
   <p>
    one harnesses a vicious horse to a good cart. Only from time to time the lustre of this "Good" becomes old and weak,
   </p>
   <p>
    the instincts no longer really believe in it , refuse any longer to be yoked to it. Then the culture breaks in pieces , slow- ly as a rule , so that what we call ancient takes centuries to die.
   </p>
   <p>
    And before the old, dying culture and morality can be dissolved into a new one , in that fearful , dangerous , painful stage , mankind must look again into its 32
   </p>
   <p>
    own soul , must see the beast arise in
   </p>
   <p>
    itself again, must again recognize the overlordship of the primeval forces in itself, forces which are super - moral. Those who are fore-ordained , prepared
   </p>
   <p>
    and ripe for this event are Karamazoffs . They are hysterical and dangerous , they are as ready to be malefactors as asce-
   </p>
   <p>
    tics , they believe in nothing except the utter dubiousness of every belief.
   </p>
   <p>
    Every symbol has a hundred interpre- tations , of which every one may be right. The Karamazoffs too have a hun-
   </p>
   <p>
    dred interpretations. Mine is only one of them, one of a hundred . This book
   </p>
   <p>
    of Dostoevsky's has hung a symbol round the neck of mankind , has erec-
   </p>
   <p>
    ted a monument for it just as an indi- vidual might in a dream create for him- self an image of his warring instincts and forces.
   </p>
   <p>
    It is phenomenal that one human being 33
   </p>
   <p>
    could have written "The Brothers Ka- ramazoff". Now that the phenomenon has occurred , there is no necessity to explain it. But there is a profound ne- cessity to emphasize this phenomenon , to read the writing as completely as pos-
   </p>
   <p>
    sible , as comprehendingly as possible, to learn as much as possible of its won- derful magic. My work is to contribute a thought, a reflexion , a commentary to that end , nothing more. No one must suppose that I set forth these thoughts and suggestions as Do- stoevsky's own . On the contrary, no great seer or poet, even if he had the
   </p>
   <p>
    power, has ever explained his story in its final significance .
   </p>
   <p>
    In conclusion I would point out that this mystical romance , this dream of man, does not merely indicate the threshold
   </p>
   <p>
    across which Europe is stepping, the dangerous moment of hovering between 34
   </p>
   <p>
    the Void and the All. It also discloses
   </p>
   <p>
    the rich possibilities of the New Life . In this connexion the figure of Ivan is astonishing. We learn to know him as a modern , accommodating , cultivated in- dividual , somewhat cool , somewhat dis-
   </p>
   <p>
    appointed , somewhat sceptical , some- what tired. But he gets younger, more
   </p>
   <p>
    ardent, more significant, more Karama- zofflike. It is he who wrote the poem
   </p>
   <p>
    of the "Great Inquisitor". It is he who, after coolly ignoring the murderer whom he believes his brother to be , is driven in the end to the deep sense of his own culpability and even to his self- denounce-
   </p>
   <p>
    ment. And it is he too who experiences the most clearly and the most signifi- cantly the spiritual explanation of the unconscious. (On that indeed every- thing turns. That is the whole meaning of the Downfall , the whole new birth arises from it. ) In the last part of the book is a very singular chapter in which 35
   </p>
   <p>
    Ivan , coming home from his interview with Smerdyakoff, sees the devil seated there and converses with him for an hour. This devil is no other than Ivan's unconscious , no other than the shaken-
   </p>
   <p>
    up content, long submerged and appa- rently forgotten, of his own soul. And he knows it too. Ivan knows it with
   </p>
   <p>
    astonishing certainty and distinctly says so . Nevertheless he speaks with the de- vil, nevertheless he believes in him for what is inward , is outward. Never- theless he is angered against him, even
   </p>
   <p>
    throws a glass at him whom he knows to come from within himself. Surely no poem has ever set forth with more lucid clearness the communion of a human with his own unconscious self. And this
   </p>
   <p>
    communion , this (anger notwithstan-
   </p>
   <p>
    ding) intimate understanding with the devil, this is just the road that the Ka- ramazoffs have been elected to show us.
   </p>
   <p>
    Indeed Dostoevsky shows the uncon- 36
   </p>
   <p>
    scious to be the devil. And rightly . For that which is within us is distorted by our tamed , cultivated , moral vision in- to something hateful and Satanic . But some sort of combination of Ivan and
   </p>
   <p>
    Alyosha would indeed provide that higher, more fruitful foundation upon which a new world must be built. Then
   </p>
   <p>
    the unconscious will no longer be the devil but the God - Devil , Demiurgus,
   </p>
   <p>
    He who was always , who comes from the All. To find a new Good and a new
   </p>
   <p>
    Evil is not an eternal matter, is not the concern of Demiurgus. That is the busi- ness of mankind and its humbler and smaller Gods.
   </p>
   <p>
    A whole chapter would have to be writ- ten about another, a fifth Karamazoff, who plays a sinister but important role, although he always remains half shroud- ed. This is Smerdyakoff, an illegitimate Karamazoff. It is he who has assassina- 37
   </p>
   <p>
    ted the old man. It is he who faces an
   </p>
   <p>
    omnipresent God, as a self- convicted murderer. It is he who has to teach Ivan,
   </p>
   <p>
    the learned , about the most godly and the most mystical matters. He is the most unpractical and at the same time the wisest of all Karamazoffs . But I find no space to do justice to him , the most mysterious Karamazoff, in this essay.
   </p>
   <p>
    Dostoevsky's book is not one that you
   </p>
   <p>
    can cut bits out of. I could go on for days seeking and finding new features all pointing in the same direction. One, a specially delightful and beautiful one, is the hysteria of the two Hohlakovs. Here we have again the Karamazoff ele-
   </p>
   <p>
    ment intermingled with all that is strange and sick and bad in two characters. One
   </p>
   <p>
    of them, the mother Hohlakov, is sim- ply unhealthy. Her behaviour is the re- sult of habit which age has confirmed ; the hysteria is merely illness , debility ANN 38 HERM HESSE
   </p>
   <p>
    and stupidity. But in the case of the magnificent daughter, it is not weariness which shows itself as a form of hysteria but a passionate exuberance . She is haunted by the future . Immaturity and ripe love oppose each other in the scale.
   </p>
   <p>
    She developes the idea and vision of evil much further than her insignificant
   </p>
   <p>
    mother and yet the astonishing thing about the daughter is that the innocence and power behind her most wicked and shameless acts points her towards a fu- ture full of promise. The mother Hohla- kov is a hysterical , fit for a sanatorium and nothing else . The daughter is a neu- rasthenic whose illness is the symptom
   </p>
   <p>
    of a noble energy to which expression is refused .
   </p>
   <p>
    And do these developements in the souls of imagined characters of fiction
   </p>
   <p>
    really signify the Downfall of Europe ? Certainly. They signify it as surely as 39
   </p>
   <p>
    the mind's eye percieves life and eter- nity in the grass - blade of spring and death and its inevitability in every fal-
   </p>
   <p>
    ling leaf of autumn . It is possible that the whole "Downfall of Europe " will
   </p>
   <p>
    play itself out "only " inwardly, "only" in the souls of a generation, “only” in changing the meaning of worn- out sym- bols , in the dis - valuation of spiritual values . Thus , the ancient world , that first brilliant coining of European cul- ture , did not go down under Nero . Its destruction was not due to Spartacus nor to the Germanic tribes. But "only "
   </p>
   <p>
    to a thought out of Asia , that simple, subtle thought, that had been there very long but which took the form the teacher Christ gave to it.
   </p>
   <p>
    Naturally, one can if one likes regard "The Brothers Karamazoff" from a lite-
   </p>
   <p>
    rary point of view, as a work of art. When the unconscious of the whole 40
   </p>
   <p>
    continent and age has made of itself poe- try in the nightmare of a single , prophe- tic dreamer, when it has issued in his awful , blood- curdling scream, one can of course consider this scream from
   </p>
   <p>
    the standpoint of a singing - teacher. Doubtless Dostoevsky was a very gift-
   </p>
   <p>
    ed poet in spite of the enormities one finds in his books. From such enormi-
   </p>
   <p>
    ties , a poet pure and simple , such for instance as Turgenev, is free . Isaiah too was an extremely gifted poet. But is that important ? In Dostoevsky, espe- cially in "The Karamazoffs ", one finds
   </p>
   <p>
    certain exaggerated and tasteless things. Such things , which would not do for artists , come about where a man already stands beyond Art. No matter. Even as an artist this Russian prophet now and then proves himself, makes himself fa- mous , makes himself a world - wide ce- lebrity. And one reflects with a strange feeling that for the Europe of the time 4I
   </p>
   <p>
    when Dostoevsky had already written all his books , others than he were val- ued with the greatest European poets, Flaubert for instance . In comparison with "The Karamazoffs " Flaubert's work
   </p>
   <p>
    becomes quite a small artistic affair . Soon, European youth will hate and sneer at him with their elementary injustice , if
   </p>
   <p>
    only as a punishment for the exagger- ated patronage of their fathers . No , this is no time for artists , that time has bloomed itself away .
   </p>
   <p>
    But here I come upon a bye-road. Later on it will be time for me to consider
   </p>
   <p>
    why, at this juncture , Flaubert came dis- turbingly across my path and tempted me away from my concept. That too will have its own special significance . Now I must stick to my chief concern. I was going to say : perhaps the less such a world-book is a work of art , the truer
   </p>
   <p>
    is its prophecy. And , besides , it seems to me that there is so much that is re- 42
   </p>
   <p>
    markable and yet not wilful , not the
   </p>
   <p>
    work of a single intelligence , in the ro- mance , in the fable and in the invention of the Karamazoffs . It seems not to be
   </p>
   <p>
    a poet's work. For instance , to say every- thing at once , the most significant fact in the whole work is that the Karama- zoffs are innocents. All these four Kara-
   </p>
   <p>
    mazoffs , father and sons , are dangerous, incalculable human beings. They have peculiar paroxysms , peculiar conscious- nesses , peculiar unconsciousnesses. One is a drunkard , the other a woman- hunter ; another is fantastic hermit , the last is a poet of secret blasphemous ver- ses. These peculiar brothers threaten much danger to others . They seize people
   </p>
   <p>
    by the beard , they do people out of mon- ey, they menace people with death- and yet they are innocent and in spite of all, none of them have done anything really criminal. The only murderers in this long novel, which is chiefly concerned with 43
   </p>
   <p>
    murder, robbery and crime , the only guilty murderers are the magistrate and the jury, the representatives of an an- cient, honoured order, honest and blame- less citizens. They condemn the inno- cent Dmitri , they scoff at his innocence , they are judges who estimate , criticize God and the world according to their code. And it is just they who err, just they who do fearful injustice , just they who become murderers , from prejudice,
   </p>
   <p>
    from fear, from shallow- mindedness. That is not a discovery , it is not a mat- ter of literature . It is not the work of
   </p>
   <p>
    the smugly efficient literary detective or of the witty and satirical man of let- ters playing the social critic . We know all about that sort of thing and we are distrustful and we have ceased to believe
   </p>
   <p>
    in it for a long time . No , for Dostoev- sky the innocence of the criminal and
   </p>
   <p>
    the culpability of the judge is not in the least a cunning pretence . It is a fearful 44
   </p>
   <p>
    thing which stands forth and grows so surely, is rooted so deeply, that finally, almost in the last stage of the book , one
   </p>
   <p>
    stands aghast before the fact. One stands and gazes at the whole pain and insani- ty of the world , at the suffering and lack of understanding of men , as though one were facing a wall.
   </p>
   <p>
    I said Dostoevsky is not a poet, or he is only a poet in a secondary sense. I called him a prophet. It is difficult to say exactly what a prophet means. It seems to me something like this . A pro- phet is a sick man , like Dostoevsky, who was an epileptic. A prophet is the sort of sick man who has lost the sound sense of taking care of himself, the sense which
   </p>
   <p>
    is the saving of the efficient citizen. It would not do if there were many such,
   </p>
   <p>
    for the world would go to pieces. This sort of sick man , be he called Dosto-
   </p>
   <p>
    evsky or Karamazoff, has that strange 45
   </p>
   <p>
    occult, godlike faculty, the possibility of which the Asiatic venerates in every maniac. He is a seer and an oracle . A
   </p>
   <p>
    people , a period, a country, a continent has fashioned out of its corpus an organ, a sensory instrument of infinite sensi-
   </p>
   <p>
    tiveness , a very rare and delicate organ. Other men, thanks to their happiness and health , can never be troubled with this endowment. This sensory instru-
   </p>
   <p>
    ment, this mantological faculty is not
   </p>
   <p>
    crudely comprehensible like some sort of telepathy or magic , although the gift can also show itself even in such con-
   </p>
   <p>
    fusing forms. Rather is it that the sick man of this sort interprets the move- ments of his own soul in terms of the universal and of mankind . Every man has
   </p>
   <p>
    visions , every man has fantasies , every man has dreams. And every vision, every
   </p>
   <p>
    dream , every idea and thought of a man , on the road from the unconscious to the conscious , can have a thousand 46 HESSE
   </p>
   <p>
    different meanings , of which every one can be right. But the appearances and visions of the seer and the prophet are
   </p>
   <p>
    not his own. The nightmare of visions which oppresses him does not warn him of a personal illness , of a personal death but of the illness , the death of that cor- pus whose sensory organ he is. This cor- pus can be a family, a clan , a people or it can be all mankind . In the soul of Do-
   </p>
   <p>
    stoevsky a certain sickness and sensi- tiveness to suffering in the bosom of mankind which is otherwise called hys- teria, found at once its means of expres- sion and its barometer. Mankind is now
   </p>
   <p>
    on the point ofrealising this . Already half Europe, at all events halfEastern Europe, is on the road to Chaos. In a state ofdrun-
   </p>
   <p>
    ken illusion she is reeling into the abyss and, as she reels , she sings a drunken hymn such as Dmitri Karamazoff sang. The insulted citizen laughs that song to
   </p>
   <p>
    scorn, the saint and seer hear it with tears . THOUGHTS
   </p>
   <p>
    ON DOSTOEVSKY'S
   </p>
   <p>
    " IDIOT" DOSTOEVSKY'S IDIOT, PRINCE LYOV
   </p>
   <p>
    Myshkin, has often been compared with Christ. Of course such a comparison can be made. One can compare with
   </p>
   <p>
    the Saviour every man who lays bare magical truth , who no longer separates thought from life and who on that ac-
   </p>
   <p>
    count lives a life of solitude among hos- tile neighbours . From that point ofview there seems to be no great likeness be- tween Myshkin and Jesus. Only one trait in Myshkin's character, but that an im- portant one , appears to me as Christlike.
   </p>
   <p>
    I allude to his timid , morbid purity. The secret fear of sex and of procreation is a trait which must be reckoned with in the
   </p>
   <p>
    message of Christ for it plays a distinct part in his world mission . Even the su-
   </p>
   <p>
    perficial portrait of Jesus by Renan does not entirely overlook this feature . But it is curious - little as I sympathise
   </p>
   <p>
    with the constant comparison between 50
   </p>
   <p>
    Myshkin and Christ- that I also see the two intermingled in some strange fashion . This occurred to me only latterly and in connexion with a point of comparative insignificance . It came into my mind one
   </p>
   <p>
    day, while I was thinking of the Idiot, that my first thought of him was always
   </p>
   <p>
    an apparently secondary one . In the first
   </p>
   <p>
    flash of my imagination , I always see him in one particular minor side - scene , in it- self not specially significant. And so it is with Christ. When any association sug-
   </p>
   <p>
    gests to me apresentation ofJesus or when the word of Christ meets my ear or my eye, then I never see Him on the Cross
   </p>
   <p>
    or in the desert , or as miracleworker or as a raiser of the dead. I see Him in that
   </p>
   <p>
    moment when He drinks the cup of soli- tude to the dregs in the Garden ofGethse- mane, when His soul is torn by the agony of death through which He must pass to His higher birth and how He then in a last
   </p>
   <p>
    moving and childlike longing for comfort, 5I
   </p>
   <p>
    turns to His disciples. He turns to them for a little human warmth , for a fleeting illusion of affection in the midst of His bitter loneliness . He turns to them — and
   </p>
   <p>
    the disciples are asleep . There lie excel- lent Peter and beautiful John ; they are
   </p>
   <p>
    all asleep together, these worthy men, about whom Christ in His goodness has experienced disappointments over and over again. He has shared His thoughts with them as though they understood His words , as though it were in actual fact
   </p>
   <p>
    possible to communicate His thoughts to such as these , to arouse in them some- thing like a vibration of kinship , some- thing akin to understanding, to relation- ship , to unity with Himself. And now in the moment of unbearable torment, He turns to these few comrades He has.
   </p>
   <p>
    He is so utterly human , so utterly alone , so utterly the Man of Suffering, that He would now approach them as never be- fore , to find some poor solace , some 52
   </p>
   <p>
    poor support in any stupid word they might utter, even in a friendly gesture . But no , they are not even there - they are sleeping - snoring. This cruel moment, in what way I know not, seared itself into my mind in early youth, and when I think of Jesus , un- failingly it springs into my memory. The parallel with Myshkin is this. When I think of The Idiot, an apparently un-
   </p>
   <p>
    important moment bursts upon me in the same way. In that case also the mo- ment is one of incredible isolation , of tragic solitude . The scene I have in mind is that evening in Paslovsk in the Lebe-
   </p>
   <p>
    dyev's house , when the prince , conva- lescent, some days after his epileptic attack, receives the visit of the whole
   </p>
   <p>
    Epanchin family. Into this society, se- rene and elegant, in spite of tensions and hidden fires beneath , there sudden- ly bursts a band of young revolutiona- ries and nihilists. The wretched youth 53
   </p>
   <p>
    Ippolit with the pretended "Son of Pav- lishtchev", with the "Boxer" and the other individual make their appearance .
   </p>
   <p>
    Then comes that disagreeable , repellent scene , a scene which one reads with
   </p>
   <p>
    equal excitement and disgust. These shallow-minded and misled youths stand
   </p>
   <p>
    upon the stage , naked in their helpless malignity. Every single one of their words inflicts a double pain upon Mysh-
   </p>
   <p>
    kin, the pain of their effect upon him- self and the pain caused by the revela- tion of their own souls through every
   </p>
   <p>
    word they utter. This strange and un- forgettable scene , though not in itself particularly weighty is the one to which I referred . On the one side a company
   </p>
   <p>
    of elegant people , people of the world, rich, powerful and conservative . On the other the raging young anarchists , inex- orable in their hostility, caring only to
   </p>
   <p>
    gratify their spite against everything that exists, with consideration for no one and, 54
   </p>
   <p>
    in spite of their rhetorical pretence of intellectuality, wild , foolish, trashy. Be- tween these two parties , the prince , a- lone, exposed to the fire of both, regard- ed with equal distrust by both. And how does the situation end ? Myshkin , in spite of small mistakes , due to his agitation, reveals his sweet , tender, childlike na- ture. He smilingly accepts affront and in- sult, answers the most shameless with a Christlike selflessness , is ready to accept
   </p>
   <p>
    all the fault, to take upon himself all the blame and exactly in such a way as to incur the full weight of odium , displea- sure and contempt from both sides -not from one side or the other - but from
   </p>
   <p>
    both. All turn away from him , for he has trodden on the toes of all. One moment more and the extremest social antago-
   </p>
   <p>
    nisms, differences in ages and opinions are wiped out. All are completely united in a common resentment against the single clean one amongst them. 55
   </p>
   <p>
    Upon what turns the impracticability of a being such as The Idiot in this world ? Why does no - one understand this man whom almost all somehow or other love , whose tenderness is so sym-
   </p>
   <p>
    pathetic to all as to lead to a sort of transfiguration ? What separates this ma- gical creature from ordinary men ? Why are they right when they turn aside from
   </p>
   <p>
    him ? Why must they necessarily do so ? Why must he be like Christ who was deserted not only by the world but even by His own disciples ? It is because the Idiot thinks other thoughts than the rest of the world. It is not because his thinking is less logi- cal or more childlike than theirs. His
   </p>
   <p>
    thinking is that which I call "magical". This compassionate Idiot denies the whole of Life , all thinking and feeling, all that the world and reality mean to others. For him Reality is something entirely different than for them . Their N MAN E 56 HER HESS
   </p>
   <p>
    Reality is for him a shadow. For that reason, because he sees and offers a
   </p>
   <p>
    new Reality, he becomes the enemy. The difference is not that they esteem
   </p>
   <p>
    highly such values as power and wealth, family and state and that he does not. It is not that he stands for the Spirit while they stand for the Material or whatever way one likes to put it. That is not the reason. For the Idiot too , material con-
   </p>
   <p>
    cerns matter, he invariably recognizes the significance ofsuch things even though he does not consider them of prime impor- tance . His gospel is not an ascetic - Indian ideal , a dying to the world of apparent reality to make the joy of the immortal soul which alone shall know Truth .
   </p>
   <p>
    No , Myshkin would readily come to an
   </p>
   <p>
    understanding with other people regard- ing the mutual claims of Nature and spir- it and on the necessity of their working together. It is simply that while the si- multaneity and equivalue of both worlds 57
   </p>
   <p>
    is for them an intellectual concept, for him these considerations constitute Life
   </p>
   <p>
    and Reality . This is not clear. Let us try to elucidate the matter.
   </p>
   <p>
    Myshkin is different from others because, as an Idiot and an epileptic who is at the same time an exceptionally clever man, he has much closer and less obscure re- lationships with the Unconscious . He has had rare instants of intuitive per-
   </p>
   <p>
    ception, occasional seconds of transcen- dant exaltation. For a lightning moment he has felt the all-being, the all-feeling, the all- suffering, the all-understanding. He has known all that is in the world.
   </p>
   <p>
    There lies the kernel of his magical be- ing. He has not studied and is not en- dowed with, mystical wisdom, he has not even aspired to it. He has simply expe- rienced the thing itself. He has not mere- ly had occasional significant thoughts and ideas. He has literally, once and more than once , stood on the magic border- N MAN SE 58 HER HES
   </p>
   <p>
    land where everything is affirmed, where not only the remotest thought is true, but also the contrary of such thought. That is the fearful part of it, that is the part of him rightly feared by others. He
   </p>
   <p>
    does not stand quite alone , not all the world is against him. There are a few people , very doubtful , risky, dangerous people who stand in close relationship to him. Rogozhin , Nastasya. He is un- stood by criminals and by hystericals ; he, the innocent, the gentle child. But this child is not so soft as he seems. His innocence is not so harmless and
   </p>
   <p>
    men are rightly in awe of him. The Idiot is , as I said , from time to time near that borderland where every thought
   </p>
   <p>
    and its opposite are equally true . That is, he has an intuitive perception that no thought, no law, no mould , no form exist which are true and right except as regard- ed from one pole ― and every pole
   </p>
   <p>
    has its opposite . The situation of a pole, 59
   </p>
   <p>
    the taking up , that is to say, of a posi- tion from which to view and order the
   </p>
   <p>
    world, is the first stage in the foundation
   </p>
   <p>
    of every cultural form , of every society and morality.Whosoever considers Spirit and Nature , Spirit and Freedom, Good and Evil as interchangeable , if only for a moment , is the deadliest foe of every order of civilization . For there begins the contrary of Order; there begins Chaos.
   </p>
   <p>
    A line of thought which turns back to the Unconscious , to Chaos , disturbs every human system of order. It was once said to the Idiot that it was lament-
   </p>
   <p>
    able he no longer told only the truth. So it was. Truth is everything. It is pos- sible to say "Yes " to everything. But , to order the world , to achieve material re- sults , to render possible Law, Society, Organisation, Culture and Morality, No must follow Yes. The world must be po-
   </p>
   <p>
    larised , it must be divided against itself into Good and Evil. Establish every 60
   </p>
   <p>
    "No", every prohibited thing, every wickedness upon a foundation suffi- ciently solid to make it accepted law and as soon as such law is enforced , as soon as it becomes the basis of a new
   </p>
   <p>
    mode of viewing things , a new order, it equally becomes absolute and sacred. Highest Reality in the sense of human culture is the division of the World into
   </p>
   <p>
    Light and Dark, Good and Evil , Allow- ed and Forbidden. Highest Reality for Myshkin is the magical experience ofthe reversability of all institutional forms, of the existence of a negative equivalent to all moral values. The Idiot finally consi- dered , introduces the Mother- claim of the Unconscious , he is the blaster of Ci- vilisation . He does not break the Tables
   </p>
   <p>
    of the Law, he simply turns them round and shows that the contrary to them is written on the other side.
   </p>
   <p>
    It is the secret of this terrifying book that this enemy of Order, this fearful 61
   </p>
   <p>
    destroyer does not appear as a malefac- tor but as a charming , shy creature full of childlike grace , full of warm- hearted, unselfish goodness. Dostoevsky drew upon the depths of his imagination when he made this man a diseased epileptic . All Dostoevsky's harbingers of a new and fearful and sinister future , all his forerunners of Chaos are enigmatic , bur- dened with pain and disease , Rogozhin , Nastasya, the four Karamazoffs . All are
   </p>
   <p>
    represented as strange , exceptional be- ings but in such a way that their eeriness and soul - sickness inspire that sort of awed veneration that the Asiatics feel for the insane . The remarkable and pe- culiar thing is not that a genial epileptic of between fifty and sixty years of age, had such fantasies and made an epic of
   </p>
   <p>
    them. The significant, the ominous con- sideration is that during three decades the youth of Europe has more and more been accepting these books as full of 62
   </p>
   <p>
    prophetic gravity. Another strange thing is that we look these criminals , hysteri- cals and idiots of Dostoevsky in the face
   </p>
   <p>
    in quite a different way from that in which we regard the criminals or fools in other novels , even in novels we have affection for. It is strange and uncanny
   </p>
   <p>
    to realise that in some curious way we
   </p>
   <p>
    love these bad people , to realise that there must be in us something akin to them, something that is like them. This does not come about by chance and still less is it anything to do with the obvious and literary in Dostoev- sky's work. Puzzling as are certain of his characteristics - consider only the way
   </p>
   <p>
    he bears one forward towards a solidly constructed psychology of the Uncon- scious — we are not surprised at his work being the finished expression of a highly developed insight nor at its artistic in- terpretation of a daily world with which we are thoroughly familiar. What actu- 63
   </p>
   <p>
    ally impresses us is its prophetic import, its foreshadowing of a disintegration and of a Chaos into which we have during these last years seen Europe obviously descending. It is not as though this world of Dostoevsky's were a picture of the future in an ideal sense. No one
   </p>
   <p>
    will accept it as that. No , we do not feel that Myshkin and the rest afford us a prefiguration in the sense of "This is what you must become ". It is some- thing different but fully as significant : "We must pass through this . This is our Destiny ." The future is uncertain but the road which he shows can have but one mean-
   </p>
   <p>
    ing. It means a new spiritual dispensa- tion. This takes us beyond Myshkin , it
   </p>
   <p>
    points towards magical thinking, to the acceptance of Chaos , to return to anar- chy, back into the unconscious , into formlessness , into the beast, back far beyond the beast , back to the begin- 64 HESSE .
   </p>
   <p>
    nings of everything. Not to stay there, not to become beast or primeval matter but to start in a fresh direction , to dis- cover new springs of developement and action deep down in the roots of our being in order to reach to a higher and nobler creation and valuation and divi- sion of the world. No programme can
   </p>
   <p>
    teach us to find this road , no revolution will cast down the walls that we may enter into it. Each one must approach it alone , each one for himself. Each one of us must in one hour of his life stand on the threshold ofthe borderlandwhere
   </p>
   <p>
    Myshkin stood, where truths cease and new ones begin. Each one of us must once , for one moment in his life , expe- rience something of what Myshkin ex- perienced in his flashlight seconds , of what Dostoevsky himself experienced in that moment when he stood facing his condemnation and with prophetic vision, took his way onward. Stanford University Libraries PG3325
   </p>
   <p>
    3 6105 002 404 783 B73H4
   </p>
   <p>
    STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY STANFORD , CALIFORNIA 94305-6004 (415 ) 723-1493
   </p>
   <p>
    All books may be recalled after 7 days
   </p>
   <p>
    DATE DUE
   </p>
  </body>
 </text>
</TEI>
