<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TEI>
 <teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
   <titleStmt>
    <title>
     Narziss And Goldmund
    </title>
    <author>
     Hermann Hesse
    </author>
    <year>
     1930
    </year>
    <genre>
     Novel
    </genre>
    <originalrlanguage>
     German
    </originalrlanguage>
    <source>
     https://archive.org/details/dli.ernet.236666/page/n79/mode/2up
    </source>
    <originalfileformat>
     Plain text
    </originalfileformat>
   </titleStmt>
  </fileDesc>
 </teiHeader>
 <text>
  <body>
   <div>
    <head>
     CHAPTER ONE
    </head>
    <p>
     Fitst published by Peter Owen Ltd 1959 
Published in Penguin Books 1971 
Reprinted 1971,197: (twice), 1975 (twice), 1974 (twice)
    </p>
    <p>
     Copyright @ Hetmann Plesse, 1959 
All rights reserved
    </p>
    <p>
     Made and printed in Great Britain 
by H.w.ell Watson  Viney Ltd, 
Aylesbury, Bucks 
Set in Linotype Gtaajon
    </p>
    <p>
     This book is sold subject to the condition 
that It shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, 
be lent, re-sold, hired out, or othetwiae circulated 
without the publishet'a prior consent In any form of 
binding or covet other than that in which it Is 
published and without a similar condition 
including thia condition being imposed 
pa. the auhsequeot purchaser
    </p>
    <p>
     Isolated here in the North, planted long ago by a 
Roman pilgrim, a chestnut grew, strong and solitary, by the 
colonnade of rounded double arches at the entrance to the 
cloister of Mariabronn: a noble, vigorous tree, the sweep of 
its foliage drooping tenderly, facing the winds in bold and 
quiet assurance; so tardy in spring that when all glowed 
green around it and even the cloister nut trees wore their 
russet, it awaited the shortest nights to thrust forth, through 
litde tufts of leaves, the dim exotic rays of its blossom, and 
in October, after wine and harvests had long been gathered, 
let drop the prickly fruits from its yellowing crown; fruits 
which did not ripen every year, for which the cloister school¬ 
boys fought one another, and which Gregory, the Italian 
sub-prior, burned amid the logs of his fireplace. The lovely 
tree, aloof and tender, shadowed the entrance to the cloister, 
a delicate, shuddering guest from a warmer clime, secredy 
akin to the slender double columns of the gateway, the pil¬ 
lars and mouldings of the window arches, loved by all 
Latins and Italians, gaped at, as a stranger, by the inhabi¬ 
tants.
    </p>
    <p>
     Many generations of cloister schoolboys had trooped past 
beneath this stranger tree, laughing, gossiping, playing, 
squabbling, shod or barefoot, according to the season of 
the year; each with his writing-tablet; hojs with a flower 
between their lips, boys cracking nuts, boys with snowballs. 
Always there were new ones; every second year brought its 
fresh faces, though most - tousled and yellow-haired - were 
very like the boys that had passed. Some stayed and turned 
into novices, then monks, and their yellow hair was shorn.
    </p>
    <p>
     5
    </p>
    <p>
     They wore the habit and the cord, read books, taught boys, 
grew old and died. Others, at the end of their schoohdays, 
were fetched back home by their parents, into knights’ 
castles, merchants’ or craftsmen’s houses; they were let loose 
into the world, to run wild or work in it. Sometimes, 
turned into men, they would come back and look at the 
cloister, bringing little sons to put them to school with the 
patres, stand smiling for an instant, full of thoughts, as they 
saw the chestnut, and then go out again and vanish. In the 
cells and schoolrooms of the cloister, between the strong 
double redstone pillars and rounded arches, monks lived, 
taught, administered, studied, ruled. Every branch of sci¬ 
ence was pursued there, and inherited by each new genera¬ 
tion : divine and worldly lore, the dark and the light. Books 
were wrltted and annotated, systems evolved, the writings 
of the ancients collected, missals illuminated, the people’s 
belief fostered, the people’s credulity smiled upon. Here 
there was all, and room for everything, belief and learning, 
depths and simplicity, the wisdom of the Greeks and the 
Evangelists, black magic and white - all had their uses. 
There was room for repentance and solitude; room for good 
living and company. It depended on the ruling abbot, on the 
tendency prevalent at the time, which of these came upper¬ 
most for the moment, eclipsing the others. For a while the 
cloister of Mariabronn was renowned for its exorcists and 
devil-chasers; for a wliile for the beauty of its plain chaunt; 
then for a saintly father who healed and wrought miracles; 
then for its pike broth and stag’s liver pasty - each in its 
time. And ever in this tlirong of monks and scholars there 
were lukewarm and fervid fasters and rioters; always, 
among the many who lived and died there, there had been, 
here and there, an individual, one set apart from all the 
rest, whom all loved, or all feared, one who had seemed of 
the elect, who for long was remembered and talked of when 
the rest of his generation had been forgotten.
    </p>
    <p>
     6
    </p>
    <p>
     And in this age also there lived in the cloister at Maria¬ 
bronn two set apart and chosen, one old, one young. Of 
the many monks who had thronged the church, the dormi¬ 
tories and study-rooms, there were two, remarked by all, 
whom all were watching - Abbot Daniel and the teaching 
novice, Narziss, only recently entered in the novitiate, yet 
already, against all tradition, and because of his exceptional 
gifts, employed, in Greek especially, as a teacher. These 
two, the novice and the abbot, were respected and heeded 
by all the house. They were watched and aroused curiosity, 
admired and envied, slandered in secret.
    </p>
    <p>
     Most brothers loved the abbot; he had no enemies. He 
was full of goodness, humbleness, simplicity. Only the 
learned in the cloister strewed a pinch of scorn into their 
love of him. This abbot, they would say, might be a saint; 
certainly he would never be a scholar. His was that sim¬ 
plicity which is wisdom, but his Latin was poor, and Greek 
he altogether lacked.
    </p>
    <p>
     Those few who were ready on occasion to smile at the 
simpleness of the abbot were all the readier therefore to let 
themselves be charmed by Narziss - the wondrous boy, the 
beautiful young man with the elegant Greek, the manners 
and bearing of a knight, the penetrating, quiet eyes of a 
thinker, the thin, shapely, firmly outlined lips, whose bril¬ 
liant dialectic attracted scholars. Almost all the others loved 
him for the sake of his fineness and nobility. He enchanted 
many: many took no offence at the fact that he was always 
so still and self-contained, so full of courtesy.
    </p>
    <p>
     Abbot and novice, each in his fashion, bore on him the 
signs of special grace. Each in his own way ruled, each 
suffered with his own peculiar pain; each felt drawn to the 
other, more akin to him than to any in the cloister.
    </p>
    <p>
     ^ Yet neither, though he sought, could find the other, 
neither could be quite thawed by the other’s presence. The 
abbot treated the novice with perfect courtesy, with every
    </p>
    <p>
     7 ,
    </p>
    <p>
     gentle consideration, chiding him as one might a younger 
brother, a strangely delicate, perhaps too dangerously pre¬ 
cocious younger brother. The novice, in perfect obedience, 
heeded the abbot’s every rule and counsel; he never dis¬ 
puted, never sulked, and, if his superior’s judgement of him 
was right, and his only temptation was to pride, he could 
hide this sole fault to perfection. Nothing could be brought 
against him. He was perfect, but self-contained. There was 
only this: that few save scholars could be close friends with 
him; that his own distinction seemed to wrap him round, 
like a chill breath.
    </p>
    <p>
     Once, when he had confessed, the abbot said: ‘Narziss, 
l am guilty of having passed rash judgements on you. I had 
thought you proud, and perhaps I did you an injustice. 
You are much alone, brother; you have many to admire 
you, but no friends. I wished to find the pretext to chide you 
a little. But I find none. I wanted to'see you as disobedient 
as young men of your age so easily are. But you never dis¬ 
obey. Sometimes, Narziss, you make me uneasy.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The young man turned his dark eyes on the old.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Father, I want above all to bring you no sorrow. And it 
may well be that I am proud. I beg you to punish me for 
that. At times I have a longing to punish myself. Send me 
into solitude, father; or let me do the work of a lay brother.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You would be too young for either, dear brother,’ the 
abbot answered, ‘and you are wonderfully gifted, my son; 
in speech and thought. By giving you the tasks of a lay 
brother T should misuse and desecrate these high gifts. 
You seem made to be a teacher and scholar. Is that your , own 
wish?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Forgive me, father; 1 am not very clear as to my wishes. 
I shall always take pleasure in science; how could it be 
otherwise? But I do not think that learning will be my only 
service. It may not always be a man’s wishes that determine 
his destiny and his action. He may be predestined.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The abbot grew more serious. Yet his old face smiled as 
he answered. ‘In so far as I have learned to know men, I 
have seen that in our 'youth we are all of us a little inclined 
to call our own wishes predestination. To what do you feel 
yourself predestined?’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss half-closed his dark eyes, till they vanished into 
the shadow of the lashes. He did not answer. There was a 
long silence.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Speak, my son,’ the abbot commanded him. In a low 
voice, his eyes to the ground, Narziss began his answer:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Father, I feel sure that above all else I am destined to 
the life of this cloister. I know that I shall become a 
monk, a priest, a sub-prior; perhaps an abbot. My own 
wish is not for dignities, yet I know they will be laid upon 
me.’
    </p>
    <p>
     They both were silent.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘What gives you this belief?’ the old man asked, un¬ 
certainly. ‘Apart from your learning what can it be in you 
that warrants you to speak these words ? ’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss was slow with his reply: ‘It is because I have in 
me.' perception of the ways and dispositions of men; not 
mine only, but those of others. This quality in me forces me 
to serve men by ruling them. Had I no vocation to the habit 
I should have to become a judge; a ruler.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘That may be so,’ the abbot nodded, ‘but have you proved 
this faculty of yours for knowing men and their fates by any 
instance? Are you ready to give me an example?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Yes, I am ready.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Good, then - and since I would not pry into the hearts 
of the brothers without their knowledge, perhaps you will 
tell me, your abbot, what you know of me.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss raised his eyes to fix the superior.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You command me, father?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Yes, I command.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘It is hard to speak, father.’
    </p>
    <p>
     9
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘And I too, brother, find it hard to command your obedi¬ 
ence in this matter. And yet I do. So speak, then.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss hung his head and whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘I know very little of you, father. I know that you are one 
of God’s servants; that you would rather herd goats, or 
ring in to matins in a hermitage and shrive the peasants, 
than rule as the head of a great cloister. I know your e.spe- 
cial devotion to Our Lady, and that it is to her you pray the 
most. At times you pray that the Greek and other learning in 
this cloister may not draw the souls under your care from 
God; at others that you may be patient with Gregory, the 
sub-prior. And at times for a peaceful end. In tills I think 
you will be heard, and that your end will be a gentle one,’
    </p>
    <p>
     It was very still in the abbot’s little parlour, till at last the 
old man began to speak.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You are a dreamer who has visions,’ he an.swered in, a 
friendly voice. ‘Even pious and fair visions can trick us.
    </p>
    <p>
     I put no trust in them, nor must you. Now, brother dreamer, 
can you see how I feel all this in my heart.'’’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Father, I can see you think very pleasantly of it. Thi.s i.s 
how you think: “This young scholar is in some small [leril; 
he has had a vision, and perhaps he meditates too much. 
Perhaps it would do him no harm if I laid a penance on 
him, and I will take the same on myself.” That is what you 
have just been thinking.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The abbot rose. He dismissed the novice with a smile.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘It is well,’ he said. ‘Do not take your vi.sion.s too much 
in earne.st, young brother. God requires much be,sides 
visions of us. Let us say you have pleased an old man by 
telling him He will have an easy death, and that the old 
man’s heart rejoiced for an instant, to hear your promises. 
That is^ enough. Tomorrow, after early mass, you will ,say 
a Tosary,,and say it with humility and devotion; and .so will 
I. Now go, Narziss, we have said enough.’
    </p>
    <p>
     On another day Abbot Daniel had to sit in judgement on
    </p>
    <p>
     10
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss and the youngest of the teaching-fathers, who 
could not manage to agree on a certain point in the plan of 
studies. Narziss urged, very zealously, the necessity for cer¬ 
tain alterations, and could, moreover, defend them on per¬ 
suasive grounds. But Pater Lorenz, spurred on by a kind of 
envy, refused his consent to them, till their every conference 
was followed by uneasiness, sullenness, and silence, when 
Narziss, feeling himself in the right, would broach the 
subject afresh. At last, sore at heart, Pater Lorenz said to 
him:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, Narzis.s, let us end our dispute. You know that in 
this not you but I should decide. It is for you to bend your¬ 
self to my will, who are not my fellow-teacher, but my 
helper. Yet since this matter seems to weigh so heavy on 
you, and since, although I am your superior, I am beneath 
you in knowledge and in gifts, I will not pretend to have the 
last word, but let us take our dispute to our father, the 
abbot, and ask him to settle between us.’
    </p>
    <p>
     This, therefore, they did, and Abbot Daniel heard these 
two .scholars kindly and patiently, as they argued on the 
teaching of grammar. When both had spoken all their 
thoughts the old man looked at them humorously, and 
shook his white head a little as he spoke.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Dear brothers, you can neither of you suppose that I 
know as much as you of the.se things. It is very commend¬ 
able in Narziss that the school should lie so close to his heart, 
and that so he seeks to better our plan of studies. But if his 
superior thinks otherwise, Narziss has only to obey and be 
silent, since all betterment in the school would weigh as 
nothing if good order and obedience in the house were 
dc.stroyed by it. I blame Narziss for not having known how 
to subject himself; and my wish for you two young scholars 
is that you may never lack a superior whose wits are duller 
than your own. No salve for pride is better than that.’
    </p>
    <p>
     With this pleasant jest he dismissed them, yet certainly
    </p>
    <p>
     ' 'H , ■
    </p>
    <p>
     did not omit in the following days to observe the two very 
carefully, and himself discover if between them peace and 
good understanding reigned once more.
    </p>
    <p>
     Then it came about that a new face appeared in the clois¬ 
ter, which had seen so many faces come and go, and that 
this new face was not among those that pass unnoticed, and 
when they are gone, are soon forgotten. It was a little boy, 
long since announced by his father, who brought him, on 
a day in spring, to put him to school in the cloister. Under 
the chestnut tree they tethered their horses, and the porter 
had come out through the gate to meet them. The boy 
looked up at the still bare branches of the tree. ‘I have never 
seen such a tree as that till now,’ he said, ‘a rare, beautiful 
tree, and I wish I knew what they call it.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The father, an elderly man, with a peaked, care-lined 
face, did not heed the words of his little son. But the porter, 
pleased already with the boy, told him the name of the 
tree. The little boy thanked him graciously, gave him his 
hand, and said to him: ‘My name is Goldmimd, and I am to 
go to school here.’ The porter smiled and led the new¬ 
comers through the gates and on up the broad stone steps. 
Goldmund entered the cloister witliout dismay, feeling that 
here he had met two beings, the tree and the porter, with 
whom he could easily be friends.
    </p>
    <p>
     The Pater who governed the school received them, and ’ 
towards evening, the abbot himself. To both of these this 
knight, in the service of the Emperor, presented Goldmund, 
his son, and was asked to stay a while in the guest house. 
But only for one night would he use his privilege, saying 
that next day he must ride back. As his gift to the cloister 
he left one of the horses that had borne them to it, and this 
was accepted by the monks. His talk with the priests was 
smooth and cold, but both Pater and Abbot looked with 
pleasure at the silentj respectful Goldmund; this pretty, 
fine-bred boy had pleased them at once. Next day, with few 
12 '
    </p>
    <p>
     regrets, they watched the father ride off again, and were 
glad indeed to think they kept his son. Goldmund was 
taken to see his teachers, and given a bed in the scholars’ 
dormitory. He took leave of his sire with fear and reverence 
in his eyes, standing and gazing out after him, till horse and 
rider had gone from sight through the narrow arch in the 
wall of the outer court, between the mill and the granary. 
A tear still hung on his long, gold lashes as he turned; but 
the porter, who had stayed there waiting for him, clapped 
him on the shoulder pleasantly.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Lording,’ he said, to comfort him, ‘don’t be sad. Most 
begin here with a little sorrow for father, mother, and 
their brethren. But you’ll soon see! You can have as good a 
life here as anywhere.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ' ‘Thanks, brother porter,’ said the lad, ‘but I have no 
mother and no brethren. I have only my father.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, here you’ll find playfellows and learning, and new 
sports you never knew before; and tliis and that. You’ll see 
fast enough. And if you need one that means well by you, 
come to me.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund smiled. ‘Oh, many thanks, brother porter. 
And now, if you would be my friend, show me quick the 
little horse that bore me hither. I would like to greet him, 
and see if he too is glad to live here.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The porter led him at once into the stable, near the 
granary. There in the soft dusk it smelt sharp of horses, of 
oats and horse-dung; and Goldmund found his little brown 
horse in its stall, the horse that bore him to the cloister. He 
put his arms around the beast’s neck; it had known its mas¬ 
ter already, and stretched out its head to him. And Gold¬ 
mund set his cheek to the wide dappled forehead of the 
pony, which he stroked softly, and whispered in his ear. 
‘God keep you, Bless, my little horse, my brave one. How 
is it with you? Do you love me still? Do you think of our 
home? Plave you your bellyful? Litde Bless, my litde horse,
    </p>
    <p>
     ^3
    </p>
    <p>
     my friend, how glad I am to have you stay with me. I will | 
often come to see you.’ 1
    </p>
    <p>
     He took from his wallet the piece of morning bread, j
    </p>
    <p>
     which he had kept for his horse, and broke it to give him. I
    </p>
    <p>
     Then he took leave, following the porter through the court- i
    </p>
    <p>
     yard, as wide as the market-place of a great city, and grown j
    </p>
    <p>
     about with its lime trees. At the inner gate he thanked and I
    </p>
    <p>
     gave his hand to the porter, then found he no longer knew |
    </p>
    <p>
     the way to his schoolroom, though yesterday they Wd shown '
    </p>
    <p>
     him the direction. He laughed a litde and flushed red, j
    </p>
    <p>
     turned, and begged the porter to guide him, and he was very i
    </p>
    <p>
     glad to do so. So Goldmund came among his mates, where a '
    </p>
    <p>
     dozen of lads and junkers sat on benches, and the teaching- j
    </p>
    <p>
     novice, Narziss, turned his head. ‘I aba the new scholar, ;
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund,’said the boy. . j
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss gave him a short greeting, pointed, without a !
    </p>
    <p>
     ( smile, to a place on the hindmost bench, and continued at \ 
[ once with his lesson, ;
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund sat down. He was astonished to see so young ■' 
a teacher, not many years older than he; astonished, too, and j, 
very glad, to find this young teacher so handsome, so grave, 
with such fine manners, and yet so winsome and worthy 
his love. The porter had been very kind to him, the abbot |
    </p>
    <p>
     had welcomed him with gentleness; there in his stall stood 1
    </p>
    <p>
     Bless, and a little of home along with him, and here was 
this wonderful young monk, as grave as a scholar, as fine as 
a prince, with his cold, clear voice, compelling his hearers. | 
Goldmund listened gladly, though not understanding 
what the matter was. He felt at peace. He had come among 1
    </p>
    <p>
     good men, and was ready to love them in exchange, and I
    </p>
    <p>
     strive to make of them his friends. This morning in his bed, 1
    </p>
    <p>
     after he woke, he had felt so ill at ease, still weary with j
    </p>
    <p>
     the long journey, and constrained to weep as he said God- ;
    </p>
    <p>
     speed to his father. But now all was well and he was happy. i
    </p>
    <p>
     Again and again he eyed the teacher, rejoicing in his (
    </p>
    <p>
     14 ;
    </p>
    <p>
     strength and slimness, his cold, yet glowing eyes, his firm- 
drawn lips which uttered each syllable so clearly, his soar¬ 
ing, never-wearying voice.
    </p>
    <p>
     But when the lesson was done, and the noisy scholars 
started up, Goldmund awoke to know with shame that he 
had sat there dozing a long while. Nor was he the only one 
to mark it; his neighbours on the bench had seen it, too, 
and whispered it around to their fellows. Scarce had the 
young Magister left his schoolroom than Goldmund’s 
shouting companions surrounded him.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Awake yetf’said one with a grin.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘A fine scholar,’ mocked another. ‘Here’s one will be a 
shining Church light. His first lesson sends him to sleep.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Carry the babe to bed,’ proposed a tliird, and they 
pounced on his arms and legs, and lifted him high, with 
shouts of mockery.
    </p>
    <p>
     They had scared him so that Goldmund began to grow 
angry. He struck out around him on all sides, trying to 
free himself, and earned some clouts, till he ended by 
sprawling on the ground, though one still had him by the 
foot. From him he kicked himself loose, and was soon en¬ 
gaged in a bout with him. His enemy was a tall, strong lad, 
and all gathered in to watch the battle. But Goldmund stood 
his ground; he had several times clouted his strong enemy, 
and won himself friends among his fellows before any so 
much as knew his name. Suddenly they all ran off and were 
scarce gone than along came Pater Martin, the brother- 
schoolmaster, and stood looking down on Goldmund, left 
alone. He gazed in doubt at the boy, whose blue eyes an¬ 
swered him perplexed, his face a little flushed and dis¬ 
mayed. ,
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, and how is it with you?’ he asked him. ‘You are 
Goldmund - are you? Have those scamps been doing you 
any harm?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Oh no,’said the boy, ‘I held my own with them.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘But with which?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘How can I tell? I know none here yet. One of them 
fought me.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Oho! And did he begin it?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘How should I know? No, I think it wei.s I began it. They 
set on me, and so I grew angry.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, sir, this is a fine beginning. Listen to me. If you 
fight again in the schoolroom you’ll be whipped for it. And 
now - be off with you to supper.’
    </p>
    <p>
     With a smile he stood looking after Goldmund, as the boy 
ran off, abashed, after the others, trying, as he ran, to 
smooth down his yellow hair with his fingers.
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund himself agreed that his first deed here in the 
cloister had been a very rash and rebellious one. He felt 
ashamed, as he sought and joined his fellows at supper. 
But they welcomed him among them with respect, he made 
knightly peace with his enemy, and from that day on knew 
himself well liked by the scholars.
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     CHAPTER TWO
    </head>
    <p>
     Tfioooii he made good friends wiiti all Coldmund could 
noi: at once find a true friend. 1'liere was none among his 
companions to whom he felt do.sely .akin, tlioiigli they them¬ 
selves were all ;ima/.e(,l to di.'icover a very [icaccful com¬ 
panion iri this bold fighter, who had struck out right and
    </p>
    <p>
     But now this Coldmund seemed to strive to become the 
luist ;a:holar in tlu^ school. Them were two in the cloister 
to whom he was drawn to love, who pleased him .anti filled 
hi:; thoiiglits, foi’ whetm lie felt dee|i atlniiralion and rever¬ 
ence: Abbot H.aiiiel and the teaeliing-novice N.ar/iss. The 
ylhot he felt to ht: Iwly; his good and simple w:iys, his 
liiirnhle rule, comtnanthng as though it fkfered service, his 
still i-enileiiess ami peace - all litcse dnw tioldiiiund 
powerfully to him. He wouhJ liave liked laest of all to be¬ 
come I lie liody-servant d this saint:, would liave fmaight 
him, as a jierpetnal ollering, the young lad’s urge in him to 
.sacrifice, and longed to learn of him how to live a diaste and 
iiohie life, a life conformable with sanctity. Such was his 
will, and sucli had been his father’s wish ami command, 
and so it was as f hough God had ordained ii. I hough none 
in the cloister had marked it there seermd to lie ;i linrden 
laid on the shoulders of this pleasant and radiant lad, some 
secret inclinaiioii to atonement, iweii ihe ahhot did noi see 
it, although Gohlmund’s fatlu'r had liinted that it was so, 
telling him plainlv his wisli that his son slmtihl remain for 
ever ill the cloister. A hidden slain on Goldmumrs birth 
appeared to rajiiire its et£|)ialion. But the knight liad not 
pleaf.e.d the abbot, wlio answered with tfie lunootliest cour- 
r;
    </p>
    <p>
     tesy his cold, somewhat arrogant words, not heeding his 
suggestions overmuch.
    </p>
    <p>
     That other who had aroused Goldmund’s love saw 
sharper, and could perceive more of all this. But Narziss 
held back. He had felt well enough how clear a golden bird 
had flown to him. He, all alone in his fine being, had known 
himself akin to Goldmund, though in every outer thing the 
lad was his opposite. Narziss was dark and thin of face, and 
Goldmund open and radiant as a flower. Narziss was a 
thinker and anatomiser, Goldmund a dreamer and a child. 
Yet things common to both could bridge these differences. 
Both were knightly and delicate; both set apart by visible 
signs from their fellows, since both had received the par¬ 
ticular admonishment of fate.
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss took an ardent share in this young soul whose 
ways and predestination were so well known to him; and 
Goldmund glowed with pleasure at the sight of his beau¬ 
teous, meditative teacher. But Goldmund was timid, and 
could think of no other way of pleasing Narziss than to 
wear himself out with industry as a skilful and patient 
scholar. More than his shyness held him back: his love of 
Narziss was checked by a feeling that this master was a 
danger to him. How could he take the good and saintly 
abbot for his ideal and at the same time love this subtle 
scholar, the learned, the penetrating Narziss ?
    </p>
    <p>
     Yet with all the strength of his youth he pursued these 
two incompatibles. Together they caused him great suffer¬ 
ing, and often, in the first months of his schooldays, Gold¬ 
mund felt such confusion in his heart, and his mind so torn 
this way and that, as to come into sore temptation to break 
from the cloister; or else, by fighting with his mates, still his 
inner need and quench his anger. For some small plaguing 
or saucy word this good, easy comrade would flame up, 
wild for no reason, so wrath that only with many struggles 
could he manage to rein in his ire, while, pale as death and 
i8
    </p>
    <p>
     with closed eyes, he turned from his tormentors in silence. 
Then he would run off to the mangers, seek out his pony 
Bless, lean up his cheek against his forehead, kiss him, and 
sob out his heart. This pain laid hold of him by inches, and 
at last was visible to all. His cheeks thinned, his eyes were 
often dull, the laugh in which all rejoiced grew ever rarer.
    </p>
    <p>
     He could not himself have said what he lacked. His 
deepest wish seemed this: that he should grow into a good, 
trusty scholar, soon to be received in the novitiate, and so 
live on to the end, as a quiet, devout brother of the cloister. 
He believed that his whole faculties and strength were 
centred in these simple, peaceful aims, and had no thought 
nor knowledge of other strivings. How strange and hard it 
.seemed to him, therefore, that even this, his fair and quiet 
purpose, should be so difficult of achievement. From time 
to time he would lose heart, as he found himself guilty of 
sinful longings, idleness at study, day-dreams, lazy fancies, 
or drowsiness as he sat in school; rebellious impatience with 
his Latin master and groundless quarrelling with his fellows. 
But what caused most turmoil in his soul was his know¬ 
ledge that his love of Abbot Daniel could never sort with 
his other longing for Narziss, though he was sure all the 
while that Narziss loved him, could feel with his pain, and 
would succour it. Far more than even Goldmund dreamed 
were Narziss’ thoughts engaged about him. He wished this 
fresh and lovely boy, his friend, could sense in him his oppo¬ 
site and completion, longed to see into his soul, lead him, and 
enlighten his mind, cherish him and bring him to blossom. 
Yet many reasons held him back, and of these almost all 
were known to him. Most was he impeded by his scorn of 
those many monks and .scholars in the cloisters who made 
favourites of their pupils and novices. Hef often enough, 
had felt with, repulsion the longing eyes of elder men upon 
him, had encountered often enough with dumb rejections 
their proffered friendship and caresses. Now he could
    </p>
    <p>
     19
    </p>
    <p>
     understand them better. He, too, could feel in him the urge 
to cherish and instruct the pretty Goldmund, evoking his 
clear, bright laughter, brushing his pale gold hair with 
tender fingers. But he would never do it. As a teaching- 
novice, invested with the dignity of a master, yet without a 
master’s office and authority, he was schooled to especial 
prudence and self-vigilance. He had kept such distance be¬ 
tween himself and scholars only a few years younger than 
he, as he might had he been twenty years their senior: al¬ 
ways he had checked most sternly any particular liking for 
a pupil, while with those who were naturally repugnant to 
him he had forced himself to particular care and justice. 
His was a service of the intellect, to which his rigid life was 
wholly dedicated, and only in his secret mind, at moments 
when his thoughts were the least guarded, had he given 
himself up to the vice of pride, of delight in his own know¬ 
ledge and keen wits. No - no matter how much any friend¬ 
ship with Goldmund might seem to offer him, such a bond 
could only be perilous: he must never let it touch the core 
of his life, fashioned to serve the spirit through the word; 
the life of a quiet and meditative guide, leading on his 
scholars, and not them only, to higher reaches of percep 
tion, oblivious of his own pleasure or pain.
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund had been a year or more at school. He had 
played many games with his fellows beneath the limes of the 
outer court and under the lovely chestnut by the gate; 
games of ball and games of robbers, and snowball fights. 
Now it was spring, yet Goldmund was dispirited and weary: 
his head often ached, and in school he found it very hard not 
to drowse, but to mark his lesson well.
    </p>
    <p>
     Then one evening Adolf -came up to him, that scholar 
with whom his first encounter had been a fight, and who, in 
the course of this winter, had begun to study Euclid at his 
side. It was in the hour after supper, a play-hour, when scho¬ 
lars played in their dormitories, gossiped together in the 
20
    </p>
    <p>
     schoolrooms and, if they chose, might walk in the outer 
courtyard.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Goldmund,’ said Adolf, taking his arm and leading him 
down the cloister staircase, ‘I have something to tell you, 
something to make you laugh. You are a pattern scholar 
and must certainly want to be a bishop, so promise me truly 
before I tell it you that you’ll be a good companion and 
not breathe a word of it to the teachers.’
    </p>
    <p>
     This Goldmund promised him at once. In Mariabronn 
there was honour among the scholars and honour between 
the monks that taught them, and at times these two came 
into conflict. But here, as in every other place, the unwritten 
law prevailed over the written, and never, since he became 
a scholar, had he broken the law and honour of his kind.
    </p>
    <p>
     Whispering, Adolf drew him on; out through the gate 
and under the lime trees. Out here, he said, was a band of 
good resolute companions, of whom he, Adolf, was the 
leader. They had taken from earlier generations the habit 
of remembering, little by little, that they themselves would 
never be monks, and so, for a night, would break their 
enclosure, going in secret into the village. This was a plea¬ 
sure and adventure which no good scholar should deny 
himself, and, in the thick of night, they would all creep back 
again.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘But then the gates will be locked,’said Goldmund.
    </p>
    <p>
     Of course the gates would be locked, but that was what 
gave salt to the escapade: there were secret ways by which 
the adventurers could return; it would not be the first time 
they had done it.
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund remembered a scholars’ saying: ‘To go out to 
the village’ - a word he had often heard them use. By this 
was meant the escape by nights of schoolboys to every sort 
of joy and adventure, and such transgression meant a 
sound whipping from the fathers. But.he knew well enough 
that among these resolutes of Mariabronn it was a point
    </p>
    <p>
     of honour to dare such consequence, and considered as a 
mark of high esteem to be asked to share in such transgres¬ 
sion.
    </p>
    <p>
     He would have answered ‘no,’ run back through the 
gates and to bed, he felt so sick and heavy at heart. That 
whole long day his head had ached. Yet now he felt abashed 
before Adolf. And who could tell? Perhaps out there there 
would be adventures, some new and beautiful thing to 
rouse him out of his dullness, the pain in his head and all his 
heaviness and sorrow. This was an escape into the world, 
furtive and forbidden, a little dishonest, and yet perhaps a 
release, a way to happiness. He stood there listening to 
Adolf, then suddenly laughed and answered ‘Yes.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Unmarked he and Adolf crept out of sight, into the sha¬ 
dow of the limes on the wide courtyard, already dim, its 
outer gates already fastened. His comrade led him into the 
cloister mill, where, through the dusk, and muffled by the 
clamour of the wheel, it was easy enough to escape unheard, 
unseen. They clambered in through its windows onto a 
damp and slippery heap of planks, one of which they would 
have to draw out, and lay it across the stream to make them 
a bridge. Then they were outside the enclosure, standing 
together on a high road, that stretched off pale towards the 
twilight, into dark woods. All this was full of secrecy and 
excitement, and pleased Goldmund very much.
    </p>
    <p>
     A companion awaited them at the wood’s edge - Conrad; 
after long waiting another came hurrying to join them; the 
big Eberhard. The four trooped on through the woods, 
above them the cries of nightbirds; two stars glittering far 
off, wet and clear, between still clouds. Conrad gossiped 
and laughed, and at times the others laughed with him, 
yet none the less felt solemn and scared of the night, and 
their hearts thumped and thumped within them.
    </p>
    <p>
     On the far side of the wood, within a short hour, they 
reached a village. There all seemed to be asleep; the low
    </p>
    <p>
     white gables shimmered through the darkness, cross- 
hatched with dark ribs of timber. No lights anywhere. 
Adolf led them on past the silent houses; they climbed a 
wattle-fence and stood in a garden, their feet in the soft 
mould of beds, lurching down steps, and halting by the wall 
of a house, Adolf tapped at the shutter, waited and then 
tapped again: within- somebody stirred, and soon a beam of 
light shot through the chinks: the shutter opened and one by 
one they clambered through the window, into a kitchen, 
with sooty chimney and earthen floor. On the hob was a 
little oil lamp; up its thin wick climbed a weak flame. There 
stood a girl, a scraggy peasant, who held out her hand to the 
newcomers, while behind, out of the darkness, crept an¬ 
other, a young maid, with long, dark plaits. Adolf had 
brought them gifts; half a loaf of white, cloister bread, and 
sometliing wrapped in parchment, a handful of stolen in¬ 
cense, Goldmund thought, or wax from the altar tapers, or 
what not. The maid with the plaits stole back into the 
shadow, and went off, feeling her way, unlighted, to the 
door; was a long while gone, but returned with a grey 
stone pitcher, painted with blue flowers, which she gave to 
Conrad. He drank, and passed it to the others: all drank; 
it was a strong brew of cider.
    </p>
    <p>
     They sat together in the flicker of the tiny flame; the two 
maids on stiff little stools, and around them, on the earthen 
floor, the scholars, whispering and drinking cider, Adolf 
and Conrad leading their talk. From time to time one would 
rise and stroke the scraggy peasant’s neck and hair, whisper¬ 
ing secrets in her ears, though the maid with the plaits they 
never touched. Perhaps, Goldmund thought, the elder was 
the servant of the house, and the little, pretty one the daugh¬ 
ter. But that was all one to him, since he never meant to 
come back here again. Their secret creeping out of the mill, 
and stealing on through the dark wood, had been rare and 
fine, although not perilous. True it was all forbidden, and
    </p>
    <p>
     "" ^3
    </p>
    <p>
     22
    </p>
    <p>
     yet he could feel no remorse at breaking a rule. But this, he 
felt, this visiting maids by night, was sinful. Though it 
might mean nothing to the rest, to him, who would be a 
monk and live chaste, all commerce with maids was very 
evil. No, he would never come back here again! Yet his 
heart beat faster and faster in the flickering light of the poor 
kitchen.
    </p>
    <p>
     His comrades bragged to the two maids, striving to over¬ 
awe them with Latin tags, with which they adorned their 
speech. All three seemed in favour with the girls, to whom 
they crept closer and closer, with little sly love-words and 
fondlings, though the most they ever dared was a fearful 
kiss. They seemed to know to a hair what was permitted 
them; and, since their talk was all in whispers, the scene 
had in it something foolish, though Goldmund did not feel 
it to be so, He crouched very still on the floor, staring at 
the little flickering light, without a word for any of them. 
At times, with a kind of longing, he would peep round the 
corner of his eyes at the timid fondlings of the others. Then 
he would look out stiffly in front of his nose. But at heart 
he would fain have seen none of them, save only the little 
dark maid, though her especially he denied himself. Yet 
again and again his will forsook him as, when his eyes 
strayed back to the quiet sweetness of her face, he found hers 
fixed on him immovably. She sat and gazed, as if enchanted.
    </p>
    <p>
     Almost an hour slipped by - never had Goldmund known 
so long an hour- the scholars were at the end of their jokes 
and Latin; it grew quiet, and they sat a little uneasily. Eber- 
hard yawned The scraggy maid warned them it was time 
to go. All rose to their feet, all gave this serving-wench their 
hands, Goldmund the last. They reached out their hands to 
the little one, and again Goldmund was the last. Conrad 
led the way through the window, with Eberhard and Adolf 
after him: but when Goldmund made as if to follow he felt 
a hand on his shoulder draw him back. Yet he could not 
24
    </p>
    <p>
     stay. Only when he found himself in the garden did he 
linger, and not avert his eyes. Out through the window the 
maid with the dark plaits bent down to him.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Goldmund,’ she whispered, and he stopped.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Will you come back?’ she asked him. Her shy voice 
scarcely needed a breath. Goldmund shook his head. She 
stretched forth her arms and took it between her hands, and 
he felt her little palms warm on his temples. She bent far 
down, till her dark eyes were close to his. ‘Come back,’ she 
whispered, and her mouth touched his in a child’s kiss,
    </p>
    <p>
     He darted off through the little garden to the others, 
stumbling over beds, pricking his hand on a rose bush, 
clambered the wattle paling, ran through the village after his 
fellows. ‘Never again,’ his will commanded him: ‘Tomor¬ 
row! Tomorrow,’ sighed his heart.
    </p>
    <p>
     •No one surprised these nightbirds; darkness sheltered 
their return. They reached their cloister-wall, bridged the 
stream, and climbed into the mill, swung down under the 
lime trees into the courtyard, and so, by silent ways, over 
penthouse roofs, through double-columned windows, to 
their dormitory.
    </p>
    <p>
     Next morning the tall Eberhard slept so heavily that his 
room-mates had to rouse him with pillows. They were all 
in time for early mass, their morning broth, and so their 
schoolroom. But in school Goldmund was so pale that 
Father Martin asked if he were sick. Adolf warned him
    </p>
    <p>
     with a look, and he answered that he felt no pain.
    </p>
    <p>
     Towards noon, in the Greek school, the eyes of Narziss 
never left him. This master, too, could see that Goldmund 
was sick, but asked nothing, and only watched him very 
closely. When the lesson was done he called to him, and, 
to escape the eyes of other scholars, sent him with a message 
into the library. Thither he followed him.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Goldmund,’ he said, ‘can I serve you? I see you are in 
some sort of need. Yoti are sick perhaps. If so we will put 
25
    </p>
    <p>
     N.G.-2
    </p>
    <p>
     you to bed, and order you sick man’s broth, and a cup of 
wine. You had no head for Greek today.’
    </p>
    <p>
     He waited long for his answer. The pale boy looked up 
with puzzled eyes at him, hung his head, then raised it 
again, and strove with twitching lips to form a word. Strive 
as he might he could not answer. Suddenly, sideways, he 
sank down, leaning his forehead against a lectern, between 
two oaken faces of little angels, and broke into such a storm 
of weeping that Narziss, bewildered and ashamed, had for a 
while to turn away his face. Then he embraced the sob¬ 
bing lad, and raised him.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Now! Now!’ he said, in a kinder voice than Goldmund 
till then had ever heard from him, ‘amice, weep as long as 
you will, and soon you will have wept out all your tears. 
So now - sit: you need not speak. I see you have had 
enough. Perhaps you have been striving all the morning to 
stand straight and let nobody mark you. Weep - it is the 
best you can do. Already dry, and able to stand up again? 
Come with me, then, to the sick-ward, and stretch yourself 
out, and tomorrow you will wake and be well again. Come, 
boy.’
    </p>
    <p>
     He led him gendy to the sick-ward, avoiding the rooms of 
the scholars, placed him in a quiet cell, in one of the two 
empty beds, and when, in obedience, Goldmund was begin¬ 
ning to strip his clothes off, went out to call the brother 
physician, and tell him that the boy was sick. As he had 
promised he went to the refectory, where he ordered him a 
broth and a cordial; these Wo henefiem of the cloister were 
considered a great boon by those scholars whose sickness 
was not a very grave one.
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund lay in bed and strove to recover his wits. An 
hour ago he might have told himself clearly what it was that 
had tired him so that day, what fearful struggle in his heart 
had made his eyes so hot, and his head so empty. It was 
his mortal effort, again and again, with each new minute, to 
26
    </p>
    <p>
     forget the night he had passed outside the cloister ; or rather 
not the night itself, with its slippery climb across the mill- 
stream, its wild and glorious roamings in dark woods, its 
running here and there over hedges and ditches, through 
windows, down passages - but one instant of it: that instant 
only in the night when he had stood in the dark, at the 
kitchen window, feeling the maid’s breatli and hearing her 
words, touching her hand, and knowing her kiss on his 
lips.
    </p>
    <p>
     And now, to all this, was added another terror, with 
new knowledge. Narziss felt for him in his heart. Narziss 
loved him, and had him in his thoughts; he, the delicate and 
wise, the teacher with the fine, mocking lips. But Gold¬ 
mund had been foolish and wept before him, shamed, and 
unable to say a word; he had stood and sobbed before his 
eyes. Instead of doing as he had hoped, and subduing this 
learned man with the noblest weapons, with philosophy, 
Greek, feats of the spirit, and worthy stoicism, he had 
trembled and whimpered like a child. Never would he for¬ 
give himself that! Never again without shame could he 
look Narziss in the eyes. Yet, with his tears had gone the 
worst of his grief. This solitude, and the good bed, healed 
him; more than half the sting was drawn from his despair. 
Within the hour there came a lay brother with his broth, a 
piece of white bread, and a little cup of wine to go with it, 
such wine as scholars drank on feast-days. Goldmund ate 
and drank, and soon he had half-emptied his bowl, al¬ 
though, before it was done, he pushed it aside, and strove to 
think again. But he could not, so seized his bowl of broth, 
and ate it all up to the end. Later, when the door softly 
opened, and Narziss stole in to visit the sick scholar, Gold- 
rniind lay there asleep, and his cheeks were red again. Nar¬ 
ziss stood with curious eyes, staring quietly down, m a kind 
of envy. He saw; Goldmund was not sick; no need to send 
him wine next morning. Now the ban was lifted, and they
    </p>
    <p>
     ^7
    </p>
    <p>
     could be friends. Today it was the boy who needed him, 
and so he had been able to do him service. Next time he 
perhaps would be the weak one, needing love, comfort, and 
help, and then from this scholar he would take diem, if ever 
it should come to such a pass.
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     CHAPTER THREE
    </head>
    <p>
     It was a strange friendship that grew up between Narziss 
and Goldmund, one which pleased few, and, at times, al¬ 
most seemed to displease the friends. Narziss the thinker 
had at first to bear the heavier burden. To him all was 
thought, even love. In their love he was the guiding spirit, 
and, for long, only he of the two was conscious of the depths, 
scope, and meaning of their bond. For long, although he 
loved, he was alone, knowing that his friend could not in 
reality be his till he had led him into the knowledge of 
himself. Goldmund gave himself up to this new love with 
eager joy, playing unconsciously like a child. Narziss, 
responsible and conscious, accepted and pondered their high 
destiny.
    </p>
    <p>
     To Goldmund, Narziss brought relief and freedom. His 
first desire had been awakened by the sight and kiss of a 
pretty maid: all his longings to be cherished had been 
roused, and yet scared to desperation, and driven back. 
This had been his deepest fear: that everything he had 
dreamed till then of life, his hope and belief in his vocation, 
the future to which he felt predestined, had been imperfiled 
at its root by that kiss given at the window, and the sight of 
the maid’s dark eyes. Destined by his father to be a monk, 
and accepting the behest with his whole heart, aspiring with 
all the fire of his young ardour to the pious heroism of chas¬ 
tity, he had known, at this passing touch, this first call of 
life to his senses, that here was his enemy and demon; that 
women were his worst and constant temptation.
    </p>
    <p>
     Yet now fate had seemed to save him; now, at the height
    </p>
    <p>
     of his need, this friendship showed his longing a garden in 
flower, in which to erect new altars to his reverence. Here 
he might love without reproach, transmuting all the peri¬ 
lous fires of sense into clear, sacrificial flame.
    </p>
    <p>
     Yet even in tlieir earliest spring of friendship he encoun¬ 
tered strange, unlookcd for, impediments, sudden coldness, 
terrifying demands. It lay so far from his nature to see in his 
friend a contradiction and opposite. To him it seemed that 
only love was needed, only sincere and unconstrained devo¬ 
tion, to make one of two, and quench all differences, to 
build a bridge between all opposites. Yet how dour and cer¬ 
tain, clear and inexorable was this Narziss. To him the harm¬ 
less, natural gifts of love, a pleasant vagrancy together 
through the lands of friendship' and desire, seemed things 
unknown, or never sought. This joy in paths leading no¬ 
where, in, dreamy straying without a purpose, was one he 
refused, and would not tolerate. True that when Goklmiind 
was sick he had been troubled, that in matters of school and 
learning he helped and advised him on many points: he 
would construe difficult passages in books for him, open 
out new paths in the realms of grammar, logic, and philo¬ 
sophy; but never did he seem truly satisfied, and never at one 
with his friend. Often indeed he appeared to scorn him, and 
treat his words as a jest,
    </p>
    <p>
     And Goldmund felt that this was more than pedantry, 
more than an elder and wiser, showing his power; that 
something far deeper lay behind it. Yet what this deep thing 
was he could never fathom, and so friendship often made 
him restless and sad, In reality Narziss knew well enough 
how much there was of worth in Goldmund. Nor was he 
blind to the fresh delicate loveliness of the boy, his natural 
power and zest for life, ffietsap and promise of his youth. He 
was no pedant, to feed a fresh young soul with Greek, or 
answer innocent love with logic. Rather he cherished this 
yellow-haired boy too much, and that to him seemed a dan¬
    </p>
    <p>
     ger, since love, for him, was not in the natural order, but a 
miracle. He must not, he felt, even satisfy his spirit with 
this freshness, never allow his affection to stray an instant 
into any pleasure of the senses. Since, if Goldmund fancied 
himself predestined to the life of a monk and an ascetic, a 
life-long striving after sanctity, Narziss was really framed 
for such a life, and only love at its highest was permitted 
him. Nor did Narziss believe that Goldmund had any voca¬ 
tion for the cloister. He, more than most, could read men’s 
souls, and here, in the soul of one he loved, he read with 
redoubled clarity and perception. He had seen into the 
depths of Goldmund’s nature, which he understood com¬ 
pletely, despite their difference, as the other, lost, half of 
his own. And he saw this nature heavily encased; set about 
with the boy’s own false imaginings, faults in his upbring¬ 
ing, things he must have heard his father say, and had long 
unravelled the whole simple secret of this young mind. 
His duty therefore was clear; to make known this 
secret to its bearer; to free his soul from its husk, restore 
this nature to itself. This would be hard, arid, worst 
of all, perhaps, he would have to lose his dearest friend by 
doing it.
    </p>
    <p>
     Slowly, with infinite care, he neared his goal. Months 
slipped away before any serious trial of his friend, any 
searching test, was essayed between them. So far, in spite 
of friendship, were they from each other, so taut the bow¬ 
string had been drawn. One of them saw, and one was 
blind, and so they went together, side by side. That the 
blind knew nothing of his blindness was a comfort only to 
himself. Narziss tried his first assault by attempting to dis¬ 
cover what experience had caused Goldraund’s weakness 
and tears, at the moment which drew them together. It was 
easier to unearth, than he had thought. Goldmund had for 
long felt the need to confess the happenings of that night, 
but for this he trusted none save Abbot Daniel, and the
    </p>
    <p>
     30
    </p>
    <p>
     abbot was not his confessor. When therefore Narziss, at a 
moment when it seemed to him good to do so, reminded his 
friend of the first occasion of their friendship, and gently 
touched on the causes of that grief, the boy answered with¬ 
out denials.
    </p>
    <p>
     1 wish you were a consecrated priest, and that so I could 
make my confession to you. I should be glad to free myself 
of a sin, and very willing to do my penance for it. Yet I 
cannot say it to my confessor.’
    </p>
    <p>
     With caution Nharziss inquired more nearly; his path was 
found.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Wm remember,’ he began, by way of trial, ‘that morn¬ 
ing when you .seemed to be sick. You cannot have forgotten, 
since that was the day which made us friends. It has often 
been in my mind. You perhaps may not have perceived it, 
hut f was very helpless that day.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Wju helpless!’ aniiwered Goldmund, incredulous, ‘I was 
the helpless one. It was I that had to stand there sobbing, 
and striving to bring out a word, until at last I howled like 
a b;)b}c Oh ~ I am still ashamed when I think of it! I 
thought I should never be fit to show myself to you again.
    </p>
    <p>
     To think you ever saw me look so pitiful 1 ’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss pressed him very cautiously.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘I can understand,’ he said, ‘that you felt ashamed by it. 
Such a fine brave fellow as you, and to stand there weeping 
before his friend - more, before his teacher. That was unlike 
you. But then I supposed you to be sick. When ague shakes 
him even Aristotle may say strange things. And yet all the 
time St was not sickness. Not even a fever. So that was why 
you were_so ashamed! Who feels any shame because he is 
shaken with a fever? You were ashamed because something 
W conquered you, because some enemy had you down!
    </p>
    <p>
     Wad anything unusual happened then?’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldinuiid did not answer him at once. Then he said 
sowy; Yes, it was something out of the common. Let
    </p>
    <p>
     32
    </p>
    <p>
     me suppose you my confessor. After all, I shall have to say 
it one day.’
    </p>
    <p>
     With eyes cast down he told his friend the story of that 
night. Narziss answered with a smile:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, it is forbidden “to go to the village”. But many 
forbidden things may be done by us, and yet we scarcely 
trouble to even think about them. Or else we confess and 
are absolved, and so become free of our guilt. Why should 
not you, like almost every scholar, join in such a small 
escapade? Is that so bad then?’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund grew angry, and poured out a torrent of 
words.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘In truth you talk to me like a pedant. You know quite 
well what happens “in the village”. Naturally I count it no 
great sin to break a few set rules of the cloister, and run 
out with a couple of schoolboys - though even that sorts ill 
with preparation for the life of a monk.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Hold,’ exclaimed Narziss sharply, ‘do you not know, 
amice^ that for many of the greatest saints just such infringe¬ 
ments have been necessary? Have you not heard that one 
of the shortest ways to sanctity may be a life of carnal riot?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Oh, enough,’ Goldmund defended himself. ‘I wanted to 
say that it was not any small infringement of rule that 
weighed me down that day, and caused me to weep. It was 
something else; it was the maid! It was a feeling which I 
could never make clear to you; a feeling that if I yielded to 
that temptation, if once I stretched out my hand to touch 
her, I should not be able to come back here, that hell would 
suck me in, like a swamp, and never let me go again. And 
I felt that then there would be the end of all fair dreams, all 
virtue, all love of God and His goodness.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss nodded very thoughtfully.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘The love of God,’ he said, weighing his words, ‘is not 
always one with our love of virtue. Oh, if it were only so 
easy ! We know the good, for it is written. But God is not
    </p>
    <p>
     33
    </p>
    <p>
     only in what is written, boy. His commandments are the 
•smallest part of Him. We may keep the commandments 
to the letter, and yet be very far from God. ’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘But don’t you see what I mean ?’ Goldmund complained.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Certainly I see. You feel that in women, in carnal 
love, there is contained all that you think of as “sin”, and 
“the world”. Of all other sins you suppose yourself in¬ 
capable, or, if you committed them, they would not weigh 
you down like this. They could all be confessed and atoned 
except this one sin.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Yes, that is how I feel’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, you see, I can understand you: nor are you al¬ 
together wrong. The story of Eve and her serpent is cer¬ 
tainly not an idle tale. And yet, amice^ you are wrong. You 
would be right, perhaps, if you were Abbot Daniel, or a 
patron saint, like your St Chrysostom; or if you were a 
bishop or a priest, or even a simple little monk. But you are 
none of these. You are a young scholar, and even if it be 
your wish to stay for ever here in the cloister or if your 
father wished it in your stead, you have taken no vows as 
yet; you are not consecrated. If today or tomorrow you 
found yourself seduced by a pretty wench, and so gave way 
to her temptation, you would have broken no oath, and 
done no sacrilege.’
    </p>
    <p>
     No written oath,’ cried Goldmund very hotly, ‘but one 
unwritten, and the holiest. The oath I have taken to mw 
seif. Can you not see that what may be valid for many others 
IS yet invalid for me.? Are you not you yourself still 
“consecrated? You took no oath to live chaste, and yet 
you would never touch a maid. Or am I deceived in you? 
Are you not truly what you seem? Are you not whatIthink 
yum Have not you too long since made a promise in your 
heart, although you never swore it openly, before your 
brothers and snperiorsf And do pu nor feci bound by it
    </p>
    <p>
     for e\w Are you not like me then?’ &gt; ■
    </p>
    <p>
     34
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘No, Goldmund, I am not like you; or rather not as you 
imagine me. It is true that I have taken a silent oath. There 
you are right. But in no other way am I like you. Today I 
will say to you a thing which one day I believe you will re¬ 
member. It is this: our friendship has only one meaning, 
only one object - that I should show you how much you 
differ from your friend.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund stood perplexed. The look in Narziss’ eyes, 
the tone in his voice, had been such that they could not be 
withstood. But why did Narziss say such words? Why 
should Narziss’ unspoken oath be more inviolable than his? 
Did he see in him only a child, to be teased and humoured? 
All the perplexities and sadness of their strange bond again 
assailed him.
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss no longer doubted the nature of Goldmund’s 
secret. Eve, the eternal mother, lurked behind. But how 
had it ever come about that so joyous and beautiful a boy, so 
full of rising sap and nascent desire, should find in himself 
so bitter a resistance? Some demon must be at work in him, 
a hidden fiend to whom it was permitted to divide this noble 
being against itself, in the essence and primal urge by which 
it lived. Good then - this demon must be named, exorcised 
and made visible to all, and, when this was done, he could 
be conquered.
    </p>
    <p>
     Meanwhile Goldmund, more and more, was neglected 
and shunned by his companions: or rather, in a measure, it 
was they who felt him to be shunning and avoiding them. 
His friendship with Narziss pleased none of them. The 
evikongued, those who had themselves loved one of the 
friends, slandered it as a vice against nature. Yet even those 
who could see plainly that here there was no vice to be re¬ 
proved still shook their heads. None granted these two 
friends to one another. By this close friendship, it was said, 
they had set themselves apart from all the brotherhoods 
th e ir fellows were not good enough for these noblemen; their
    </p>
    <p>
     35
    </p>
    <p>
     spirit was against the community, was against the charity 
of the cloister, was unchristian.
    </p>
    <p>
     Rumours of the two, complaints and slanders against 
them, began to reach the ears of Abbot Daniel. In his forty 
years and more in the enclosure he had watched many 
friendships between young men. These had their place in 
the general life of the monastery, were sometimes a jest 
and sometimes perilous. He kept apart, watching them 
carefully, without any direct interference. Such warm exclu¬ 
sive friendship as this was rare, and certainly not without its 
danger. Yet, since he could not doubt its purity, he put 
no hindrance in its way. Had Narziss not been as he was, 
placed midway between the scholars and teaching monks, 
the abbot never would have hesitated to lay on him com¬ 
mands that should separate them. . It was bad for Goldmund 
that he, had ceased to mingle with his fellows, consorting: 
with an elder, and a teacher. But would it be just to prevent 
Narziss, the learned, the youth set apart and marked by 
intellect, Narziss acknowledged as his equal, nay superior, 
by every other teacher, from going the path which he had 
chosen; impede his mission to instruct? Had Narziss not 
taught as well as before, had his friendship led him into 
sloth, the abbot would have parted them at once. But noth¬ 
ing could be brought against him; only rumour, and the 
jealous mistrust of others. Moreover Daniel was aware of 
Narziss’ unexampled gift; his penetrating, strange, per¬ 
haps presumptuous, knowledge of men. Hie did not rate 
such faculties- too high: others would have pleased him 
better in Narziss. But he never doubted that this teacher 
had seen some especial virtue in ,his friend, and knew him 
better than any other. He himself had perceived in Gold¬ 
mund nothing unusual, besides his winsomeness and grace, 
save a certain eager,, almost owlish zeal in him, with which 
this mere young scholar, and guest of the cloister, already 
seemed to consider it his home, and himself a fully pro-
    </p>
    <p>
     I fessed monk. Nor did he fear any danger that Narziss
    </p>
    <p>
     I would spur on and encourage this touching but somewhat
    </p>
    <p>
     I callow zeal. What he dreaded most for Goldmund from his
    </p>
    <p>
     i friend was that Narziss might infect the lad’s spirit with a
    </p>
    <p>
     j certain learned pride and darkness of soul, although, for this
    </p>
    <p>
     I particular scholar, the danger did not seem so great that such
    </p>
    <p>
     I risk could not be incurred. No, he would not let mistrust
    </p>
    <p>
     I infect him, nor show himself unthankful that great souls
    </p>
    <p>
     I were sometimes given into his care.
    </p>
    <p>
     I Narziss pondered much on Goldmund. His faculty to
    </p>
    <p>
     I perceive and recognize the characters and desires of human
    </p>
    <p>
     I ! beings had long achieved its purpose with the other. Already
    </p>
    <p>
     I he had found what he sought. All this glow and fervour of
    </p>
    <p>
     j youth spoke clearly to him. Goldmund bore on him every
    </p>
    <p>
     i sign of a strong and highly gifted man, rich in his body and
    </p>
    <p>
     i . his mind; at least of a man with unusual power of love in
    </p>
    <p>
     ; him whose desire and happiness lay in this: that his flame
    </p>
    <p>
     I was easily kindled, that he had in him the gift of self-forget¬
    </p>
    <p>
     fulness. But why was this young being, formed for a lover, 
this youth of the delicate perception, he who could love, and 
rejoice so well and fully in the scent of a flower or morning 
sunshine, a horse, a flight of birds, a stave of music ~ why 
was he set so firmly in his wish to become a priest and an 
ascetic?
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss pondered the matter long. He knew how Gold- 
mund’s father had encouraged this purpose in the boy. But 
could he have created the wish? What sorcery had he used 
upon his son to make him believe in such a vocation as his 
duty? And what kind of a man could this father be? Al¬ 
though purposely he had often turned their talk to him, 
and Goldmund had spoken of him frequently, Narziss had 
formed no clear image of this father: he could not see him.
    </p>
    <p>
     Was not that unusual and suspicious? When Goldmund 
told of the trout he had caught as a child, when he painted a 
butterfly in words, aped the cry of a bird, spoke of a comrade,
    </p>
    <p>
     37 ■
    </p>
    <p>
     told of a dog or a beggar, their images arose, and could be 
seen. But when he spoke of his father there was nothing. 
No, if indeed the father had been so strong and powerful, 
so dominant over Goldmund’s early life, his friend would 
have described him far better, would have brought him to 
life with far more joy, Narziss did not esteem this father 
much: the knight displeased him, and at times he would 
even doubt if this could be Goldmund’s father after all. 
He was an empty idol. Yet whence had he derived such 
power.? How had he filled Goldmund’s. soul with dreams 
so foreign to the boy’s innermost being?
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund often thought of Narziss. Certain as he was of 
his friend’s deep love there remained the constant, irksome, 
suspicion that this friend was treating him as child. What 
did it mean that Narziss should for ever be telling him how 
unlike they were to one another? Meanwhile there was 
better to do than think, and this scholar had no taste for 
close thinking. There were many things to fill up the long 
bright days with. He would often hide with the brother- 
porter, since with him he felt quite at his ease, and from 
him would cajole permission to ride again on Bless, his 
pony. He was much beloved by the two laymen who dwelt 
in the cloister, the miller, and the miller’s boy. With these 
he chased otters in the mill-stream, or would bake a loaf of 
fine prelate’s bread with them, the scent of which Gold¬ 
mund could pick out with his eyes shut from every other 
kind of meal they used. Though still he spent long hours 
with Narziss there were many when he renewed old joys 
and habits. High Mass and vespers were a pleasure to him, 
it pleased him to sing in the scholars’ choir, he loved to say 
his rosary at a side altar, and listen to the solemn church 
Latin, watch, through an ineense-cloud, the gleam of orna¬ 
ments and chasubles, gaze up at the stiff and reverent images 
of.saints along the arches of the nave: the Evangelists, each 
with his beast, St James, with his pilgrim’s hat and staff.
    </p>
    <p>
     These images seemed to entice him: he rejoiced to feel, 
in their stone or wooden shapes, some secret understanding 
with his mind; to think them, after a fashion, the undying, 
all-seeing patrons, guides and protectors, of his life. So too 
he felt a kind of love, a hidden, deep attraction, to the pil¬ 
lars, the scrolls over windows and doorways, and every 
garnishing of the altars; to the fair and clear-cut garlands, 
stems, and branches, flowers, and clumps of growing leaves, 
which burst forth from the stone of every plinth, entwining 
so persistently and vividly. To him it seemed a deep and 
precious secret that here, outside Nature, her plants and 
beasts, there should be this dumb second life, devised by 
men, and men themselves in stone: men, beasts, and plants 
in stone and wood. Often he would pass a free hour in tak¬ 
ing copies of these devices; beasts, men’s faces, clusters of 
leaves; and at times would strive very hard to draw them 
again out of his head, or from real horses, flowers, and live 
men’s masks.
    </p>
    <p>
     He loved their songs in the cloister-church, especially the 
canticle to Mary: the sure, stern lilt of these chaunts, re¬ 
turning on itself again and again to praises and bursts of 
supplication. He could either follow their severest sense 
with his prayers or, careless of what the words might mean, 
heed only the stately measure of the music, allowing its vir¬ 
tue to sink into him, its long, deep notes drawn out in plan¬ 
gent, resonant supplication, with pious reassurances of love. 
In his innermost heart he did not love learning, had no 
taste in him for grammar and logic, although these also had 
their beauty; his soul was given to the image, and sound 
world of the litany.
    </p>
    <p>
     From time to time he would overcome his estrangement 
from his companions. It is sad and irksome to live long in 
the midst of coldness and despite, Again and again he made 
a sulky neighbour laugh in school, led on a silent room¬ 
mate to gossip at night in the dormitory, strove for an hour
    </p>
    <p>
     39
    </p>
    <p>
     together to gain love, and so win back a few eyes, faces, 
and hearts. Twice, much against his will, such proffered 
friendship was rewarded with the proposal that he should 
go ‘to the village’. Then he took fright, and again shrank 
back into himself, No, he would go no more ‘to the village’. 
He had managed at last to forget the dark-haired girl; never 
to think of her-or seldom.
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     CHAPTER FOUR
    </head>
    <p>
     For long Goldmund’s secret remained proof against all 
the siege that Narziss laid against it. For long, or so it ap¬ 
peared, Narziss had striven in vain to give this hidden thing 
its voice and teach his scholar the word by which to van¬ 
quish it. Goldmund in their talks gave no clear picture of 
his home, of the life whence he had come into this cloister. 
He had told of a shadowy father, deeply respected but ill- 
defined, with a misty tale of a mother, long dead and 
vanished, who remained as a pale name and nothing more.
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss, the skilled reader of other men, had come by 
degrees to see in Goldmund one of those who have had to 
lose a part of their lives; who, forced by some need or sorcery 
in themselves, cannot think of certain matters in their past. 
He saw he would.gain nothing by teaching or questioning, 
saw he had trusted too much in the power of reason, and 
spoken many vain and useless words.
    </p>
    <p>
     But his love of Goldmund had not been vain, nor their 
custom of being much together. In spite of the depths that 
sundered them each had learned much from the other’s 
company. Between them, beside the language of reason, 
there had slowly come into being another tongue; a speech 
of signs and of the soul; as, between two dwellings, though 
there be a high road for waggoners, on which litters pass, 
and riders may jog from place to place, there are also set 
around it many lanes, field-tracks running in and out, hid¬ 
den paths on which children play, walks tinder trees for 
lovers, the half-seen trails of cats and dogs. By degrees Gold¬ 
mund’s magic power of speaking his mind in images had 
found ways into the thoughts of his friend, creeping into 
41 ^
    </p>
    <p>
     all they said together: so that Narziss, without aid of words, 
learned to feel for himself and to define much of Gold- 
mund’s nature and perceptions. Slowly, in the light of these, 
a bridge of love was built from soul to soul, and words 
could find a way along it. So that at last, when neither was 
expecting it, as they sat on a feast-day in the library, there 
arose a talk which led them on to the very heart and mean¬ 
ing of their friendship, and illumined its whole future 
course.
    </p>
    <p>
     They had sat discussing astrology, a forbidden science, 
and not pursued in the cloister. Narziss had said that it was 
a striving to order and arrange after their kinds the many 
divers sorts of human beings, their predestined character 
and their fates, Here Goldmund broke into his words.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You speak of nothing but differences! I have slowly be¬ 
gun to see that they form your own particular whimsey. 
When you speak of this great difference between us I al¬ 
ways feel that it lies in nothing, save in your own strange 
hankering to find differences.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss: ‘Right. You have hit the nail on the head. That 
is what I mean - that to you differences mean little, while 
to me they are the most important things. Mine is the nature 
of a scholar, and my branch of scholarship is science. And 
science, to quote your own words, is nothing else than a 
“strange hankering after differences”. Her essence could 
not be better defined. For men of science nothing is so im¬ 
portant, as the clear definition of differences. To find, for 
instance, on every man, those signs which mark him off 
from all other men .: that is to know him.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund : ‘But how? One has peasant’s shoes and is a 
peasant; another aferown on his head, and is a king. There 
arc your differences ! But these are seen by children, without 
, any science.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss; ‘Yet when peasant and king are clad alike chil¬ 
dren can no longer distinguish between them.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund:.‘No more can science.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss: ‘Perhaps it can. I admit that science is not any 
cleverer than a child: but she is more patient. She works 
more nearly, and sees more than the coarsest of differ¬ 
ences.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund: ‘And so does every clever child. He could 
know a king from his look and bearing. But to be plain; 
you fine scholars are proud, and you always think us duller 
than yourselves. We can sharpen our wits without science.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss: ‘I am glad to see you have noticed that. Soon 
you will have noticed, too, that I do not mean skill or cun¬ 
ning when I speak of differences between us. I do not say: 
“Your wits are sharper, or you are better or worse than 
I.” 1 only say: “You are not I”.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund: ‘That’s easily understood. But you do more 
than speak to me of differences in outward signs; you speak 
of a difference in fate and predestination. Why, for example, 
should your destiny be other than mine? You, like me, are 
a Christian; we arc both resolved to live as monks. And you, 
like me, are the child of our good Father who is in heaven. 
Our goal is the same - eternal happiness; our resolves the 
same-to return to God.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss: ‘Very good. It is true that in books of dogma 
one man is the same as any other. But not in life. I think 
that the Redeemer’s beloved disciple who laid his head upon 
His breast, and that other disciple who betrayed Him, had 
not both been framed for the same destiny.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund: ‘You are a sophist, Narziss. Along such 
paths we shall never come together, you and L’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss: ‘There is no path by which we can come to¬ 
gether, Goldmund.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund:‘Don’tspeak so, Narziss,’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss; ‘It is my earnest. It is not our task to come to¬ 
gether; as little as it would be the task of sun and moon, 
of sea and land. We two, my friend, are sun and moon; sea
    </p>
    <p>
     '43 .
    </p>
    <p>
     and land. Our destiny is not to become one. It is to behold |
    </p>
    <p>
     each other for what we are, each perceiving and honouring |
    </p>
    <p>
     it in his opposite; each finding his fulfilment and comple- j 
tion.’ |:
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund hung down his head, discomfited: his face j 
had grown sad. At last he answered: |
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Is that why you so often mock my thoughts?’ |
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss delayed with his reply. Then, in a clear, hard i 
voice, he said: , |
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Yes, that is why. And you must learn to bear with me, j 
dear Goldmund, for not taking your thoughts more |
    </p>
    <p>
     seriously. Believe me I mark and study your every accent, 
and all your gestures, each smile that comes into your face. | 
All that in you seems essential and necessary is real to me. |,
    </p>
    <p>
     Why therefore should I give your thoughts the place of I
    </p>
    <p>
     honour in my mind - you, who have so many other gifts ? ’ I
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund smiled sadly: ‘I said you always think of me |
    </p>
    <p>
     as a child.’ .. |
    </p>
    <p>
     But Narziss was still inflexible; ‘Some of your thoughts j 
seem to me the thoughts of a child. Yet remember what we j 
said a while ago; that a sharp-witted child need never be f
    </p>
    <p>
     stupider than a scholar, It is only when children speak of j
    </p>
    <p>
     science that scholars need not take them seriously.’ i
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund became impatient:‘But when I do not speak I
    </p>
    <p>
     of science you mock me! You speak as though all my piety, ’■
    </p>
    <p>
     and wish to make progress in my studies, and my longing i 
to be a monk, were so much babbling.* '
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss eyed him very gravely: ‘When you are truly 
Goldmund you do not babble. But you are not always Gold- | 
mund. I long for nothing so much as to have you Goldmund [
    </p>
    <p>
     through arid through. You are no monk - no scholar. j
    </p>
    <p>
     Scholars and monks may both be hewn of coarser wood. j
    </p>
    <p>
     You fancy you are not learned enough for me, have too little |
    </p>
    <p>
     logic, and are not pious enough. None of all these. Only - I
    </p>
    <p>
     you are not enough yourself.’ |
    </p>
    <p>
     44 !
    </p>
    <p>
     Though here in their talk Goldmund, in perplexity, left 
his friend, with anger against him in his heart, not many 
days had passed before he himself wished to continue. And 
this time Narziss succeeded in showing him, in a clear, 
vivid image, such as he himSelf would use and accept, the 
true difference in their natures.
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss had talked himself hoarse: yet today, he felt, 
Goldmund had heard him more willingly, had let his words 
sink deeper into his soul, and already he began to have 
power on him. His success made him yield to the tempta¬ 
tion to say even more than he had intended: he let his elo¬ 
quence bear him onwards.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Listen,’ he said, ‘I am only your superior in this: I am 
awake, whereas you are only half-awake, and at times your 
whole life is a dream. I call that man awake who, with con¬ 
scious knowledge and understanding, can perceive the deep, 
unreasoning powers in his soul, his whole innermost 
strength, desire, and weakness, and knows how to reckon 
with himself. The task that brings us together, the whole 
aim and purpose of our friendship, is that you should learn 
from me how to do it. In you, Goldmund, nature and in¬ 
tellect, consciousness and the world of dreams, are set very 
far from one another. You have forgotten your childhood, 
which still strives up from the depths of your being, to pos¬ 
sess you. It will always make you suffer till you heed it. But 
enough: awake, as I said, I am your superior. There I am 
stronger than you, and so lean help you.- But in all things 
else, amice,-jou are mine, or rather you will be so when 
you know yourself.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund had listened keenly till the words ‘You have 
forgotten your childhood.’ On these he started and flinched, 
as though an arrow had pierced his body, though this was 
not perceived by Narziss, who spoke, as he often did, with 
half-shut eyes, or staring far away into the distance, as 
though, if he did not see, the words came easier. He had not
    </p>
    <p>
     45
    </p>
    <p>
     observed how Goldmund’s lips were shaking, nor how his 
face had begun to pale.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Your superior - I?’ stammered Goldmund; but only to 
have something to answer: it was as if his whole body had 
been lamed.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘To be sure,’ Narziss concluded. ‘Men of dreams, the 
lovers and the poets, are better in most things than the men 
of my sort; the men of intellect. You take your being from 
your nwthers. You live to the full: it is given you to love 
with your whole strength, to know and taste the whole of 
life. We thinkers, though often we seem to rule you, can¬ 
not live with half your joy and full reality. Ours is a thin 
and arid life, but the fullness of being is yours; yours the 
sap of the fruit, the garden of lovers, the joyous pleasaunces 
of beauty. Your home is the earth, ours the idea of it. Your 
danger is to be drowned in the world of sense, ours to gasp 
for breath in airless space. You are a poet, I a thinker. You 
sleep on your mother’s, breast, I watch in the wilderness. 
On me there shines the sun; on you the moon with all the 
stars. Your dreams are all of girls, mine of boys
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund had heard him open-eyed, and Narziss spoke 
with a kind of oratorical self-abandonment. Many of his 
words, like blades, had entered the heart of his friend. In 
the end the boy turned pale and closed his eyes, and when 
Narziss saw, and rose in sudden fear, Goldmund, white as 
death, could only whisper:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Once I broke into sobs and wept before you; you 
remember. That must never happen again. I should never 
forgive myself, or forgive you either. Quick now, leave 
raei Let me alone! You have said some terrible words to
    </p>
    <p>
     me.’ . _
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss was sick at heart. His thoughts had borne him 
away, since he felt that he spoke better than usual. Yet now 
he perceived, in consternation, that something in what he 
had just said had struck his friend a deathly blow; that in
    </p>
    <p>
     some way he had pierced to the quick of him. He found it 
hard to leave him at such a time, and so, for an instant, he 
lingered on, till the frown on Goldraund’s forehead warned 
him. Then he went off in great confusion, leaving his friend 
in the solitude he needed. Though Goldmund wept, his 
tears were not enough to release the pent-up grief in his 
soul. In the agony of the deepest wound, and no hope at all 
of ever healing it - as if his friend had suddenly knifed him 
to the heart - he stood alone, panting heavily: his breath 
constricted as though by death, his face waxen, his hands 
limp at his sides. This was the old pain, only sharper; the 
old confusion in his spirit, the feeling that he must look on 
something horrible, something, it might be, too fearful to 
bear. And now there was no sobbing storm of tears to ease 
the anguish in his mind. Holy Mother of God, what was it 
then? Had something happened? Had he been struck to 
death? Had he killed a man? What terrible thing had they 
been saying?
    </p>
    <p>
     He gasped like one that has drunk poison, was filled to 
bursting with the thought that now he must shake free of 
something deadly, some barb, stuck in his heart. He 
stumbled from the room, flinging his arras out like a swim¬ 
mer, wandered, without knowing it himself, into the stillest, 
emptiest part of the enclosure, along corridors, down steps, 
into the air. He had come to the inner heart of the monas¬ 
tery, the central cloister; in the cool light a sweetness of 
roses lay on the warm air, chilled by stone.
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss in that hour had done unwittingly what for long 
it had been his conscious wish to do: he had named and 
exorcised the demon inhabiting his friend. Some one or 
other of his words had stirred a secret in Goldmund’s breast, 
and his demon had reared up in agony. For long Narziss 
strayed through the schoolrooms, seeking his friend, but 
found him nowhere.
    </p>
    <p>
     Goldmund stood in the shadow of the arches that open
    </p>
    <p>
     onto the little cloister garden: from the pillar above three 
heads of beasts peered down on him, three stone heads of 
dogs or wolves, and leered. His pain raged through his 
mind, finding no way to light, no way to reason. A shudder, 
as of death, clipped at his gullet: he looked up, not know¬ 
ing what he did, at one of the capitals, saw over him the 
three heads of beasts, and at once it seemed that three wild 
heads crouched, grinning and howling, in his entrails. i-
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Now I must die at once,’ he knew with a shudder. And i'
    </p>
    <p>
     then, shaking with his fear: ‘Or else go mad, and so these |
    </p>
    <p>
     beasts will devour me.’ . !•
    </p>
    <p>
     Twitching and shuddering he sank down, huddled at the ^
    </p>
    <p>
     foot of the column; his pain too great, he had reached its l'
    </p>
    <p>
     uttermost limit. His face sank between his hands, to his I
    </p>
    <p>
     mind came the darkness that he craved. I
    </p>
    <p>
     Abbot Daniel had had a bad day. Two of the elder monks | 
had come before him, peevish, chiding, slandering one an- i 
other to him, their father; complaining of some old, trivial, 
rankling difference, born of their spleen, which now, again, " 
had roused them both to bitter strife. He had listened, ; 
though all too long, to their bickerings, admonished them, I 
as he feared without success, and in the end sent them 1
    </p>
    <p>
     sternly away, each with his somewhat heavy penance. Then, j
    </p>
    <p>
     worn out, he had gone down to pray in the nave, had said t 
his prayer, and stood up unrefreshed, and so wandered 
forth to the inner cloister, led on by itS' faint scent of roses, . 
to stand a minute snuffing in the air, i
    </p>
    <p>
     He came upon the scholar, Goldmund, stretched out there I 
senseless on the flags, gazed down in horror and astonish- \
    </p>
    <p>
     ment at his deathly quiet, the pallor of his cheeks, whose \
    </p>
    <p>
     young body was, as a rule, so full of life. Today had surely ' j; 
been an evil one. And now this, to add to it all! He tried i; 
to raise the boy, but found himself too feeble for such a load. i
    </p>
    <p>
     Then, sighing deeply, he went off, to call for two of the !
    </p>
    <p>
     younger brothers to take him up, and carry him to the sick-
    </p>
    <p>
     ward, sent for Father Anselm, the leech, and lastly for Nar- 
ziss to come before him, who soon was found, and did his 
bidding,
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You know already ? ’ he asked him.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Of Goldmund? Yes, father. They told me he was 
sick, or had injured himself, and I saw them carry him 
along.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Yes, I found him in a swoon, lying where he had no 
leave to be, in the inner cloister; and he is not injured, al¬ 
though unconscious. This does not please me. And I feel 
that you have a share in it, or at least that you must know 
how it came about. It was for that I sent for you. Speak.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss, as cold as ever in speech and bearing, gave a 
short account of what he had said to Goldmund, and how 
some unlooked-for power had wrought its effect in him. The 
abbot shook his head, displeased.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘That was strange talk,’ he said, and forced his words to 
be calm. ‘You have just described such a talk as might be 
called an attack on another soul. It is, I might even say, the 
onslaught of a superior, a confessor. But you are not Gold- 
mund’s confessor: you are not confessor to any; you are 
not consecrated! How comes it then that you permit your¬ 
self to talk with this scholar as though you had spiritual 
warrant to instruct him of things which only a confessor 
has power in? As you see, the issue has been evil.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Narziss answered softly but steadily:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘It is still too early, fatiier, to judge the issue. I was some¬ 
what startled by the violent effect of what I said, but I do 
not doubt that the issue of my talk with Goldmund will be 
to heal him,’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘That is to be seen. It was not that I sent for you to speak 
of, but your own action. What impelled you to say such 
things to this scholar?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘He is my friend, as you know. I bear him a particular 
love, and feel I understand him very well. You tell me I
    </p>
    <p>
     49
    </p>
    <p>
     K.Q.-i
    </p>
    <p>
     spoke to him like a confessor. I only did so because I felt I 
know him better than he himself.’
    </p>
    <p>
     The abbot shrugged:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘I know you have particular gifts Let us hope you have 
done no lasting harm with them. Is Goldmund sick? Had 
he a fever? Had his nights been restless, or had he not been 
eating enough? Was there any pain in his body?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘No, till today his body has been in health.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘And otherwise?’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘His soul was ailing, father. You know he has long 
reached the age when men begin to struggle with carnal 
longing.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘I know. He is seventeen.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Eighteen, father.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Eighteen. Well, late enough, then. But these are merely 
natural struggles, which every man encounters in his life. 
They would not be enough to make you call him sick in 
soul.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘No, holy father, in themselves they would not be enough. 
But Goldmund’s soul was sick already, had long been so, 
and, therefore, for him, such struggles are more dangerous 
than for others. I think that he is suffering now because he 
has forgotten .some of his past’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Indeed. Which part of it, then ? ’ . „
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘His mother, and all that went along with her. I know 
no more of her than he. I only know that with her must lie.. 
some of his grief. He seems to know nothing of his mother; 
only that he lost her early, and yet he makes me feel he is 
ashamed of her, though from her he must have inherited 
most of his talents, since nothing of what he tells me of his . 
father ever shows me that father as the man to beget such a : 
fair and goodly son. None of what I tell you is hearsay,; 
father, I draw my own conclusions from certain signs.’
    </p>
    <p>
     These last words set the abbot thinking. At first Narziss 
had seemed to him foolish, and arrogant^ he had even 
50
    </p>
    <p>
     smiled a little as he listened. Now, he thought of Gold- 
mund’s father, the knight with the wizened face and trick¬ 
ing speech, and remembered, as he searched his mind, some 
words he had said of the boy’s mother. She had shamed him, 
he declared, and run from him; in his son’s mind he had 
striven to wipe out all memory of the vices which might 
be her legacy. And in this, said the knight, he had suc¬ 
ceeded, and his son was ready to give himself to God, to 
expiate the sins of his mother’s life.
    </p>
    <p>
     Never before had the abbot been so little pleased with 
Narziss. And yet, how this thinker had hit the mark; how 
well he seemed to know his friend! He began to question 
him further, of all that had happened in their talk.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘It never was my intention to rouse in Goldmund the 
heavy grief and pain that assail him. I reminded him that 
he did not know himself, and said he had forgotten his 
mother, his childhood. Something in my words must have 
pierced his spirit, forcing its way down into the darkness in 
him, with which I had been struggling so long. He was 
as though beside himself: he stared at me as if he no longer 
knew me, as if he had forgotten his own name. I had 
often said to him that he slept, and had never in all his life 
been wideawake. Now he is awake, there can be no doubt
    </p>
    <p>
     of it.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Here he was dismissed, without a penance, though with 
the command not to see his friend at present.
    </p>
    <p>
     Father Anselm had had them lay the boy in bed, and now 
sat by his side to watch him. It seemed to him best to use no 
powerful means for bringing Goldmund to his senses^ who 
looked as white as death, the old man thought, peering down, 
out of kind, wrinkled eyes. He felt the pulse, and laid his 
hand on the heart. This lad, he said to himself,, must be
    </p>
    <p>
     gorged with some monstrous dainty, a bunch of wood-sorrel, 
or some such thias^etfflM^dl^te^
    </p>
    <p>
     at his tongue. TAlEQAO • 00k ^
    </p>
    <p>
     Donation
    </p>
    <p>
     jlaa© of Dofloul.
    </p>
    <p>
     Anselm was fond of Goldmund, though he never could 
abide his friend, Narziss, that puffed-up novice, too young 
to have ever been made a teacher. There was the mischief! 
That Narziss must have some share in this silly mishap. 
What need had such a fresh and pleasant scholar, natural 
and open of heart, to consort with that arrogant pedant, so 
vain of his Greek that it seemed to him the only thing in 
the world!
    </p>
    <p>
     When, long after this, the abbot opened the door of the 
sick ward, he found old Pater Anselm still peering anxiously. 
What a young, pretty, guileless face: yet all he could do was 
to sit and study it, longing to bring it back to life, yet unable 
to give any aid. To be sure the lad might have the colic; 
he would prescribe him rhubarb and a cordial. But the 
longer he watched those sallow, distorted features, the more 
suspicious grew Pater Anselm. He had had his experience! 
Several times in his long life he had been with those po.S' 
.sessed by devils. He hesitated, even to himself, to formulate 
the whole of his thought: he must wait and examine before 
he spoke. But, he reflected grimly, if this poor lad is struck 
down and bewitched, we shall not have far to seek for the 
culprit: and he shall answer it in full!
    </p>
    <p>
     The abbot came to the bed, bent gendy down over the 
boy, and drew back one of his eyelids.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Can you rouse him ?’he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
     I would rather wait a little longer, His heart is sound. 
Nobody mu.st approach him.’
    </p>
    <p>
     :‘Is he in danger of death!” , ,
    </p>
    <p>
     I do not think so. No wounds on his body, or trace of 
any blow or fall. He has only swooned. Perhaps it is the 
colic. Great pain will often rob us of our senses. If he had 
b^n poisoned there would be fever. No, he will come to 
himself and live again.’ , .: .:
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Might it not have come from his mind?’ , '
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘I would not say no. Is nothing known of it all? Some
    </p>
    <p>
     one may have caused him to take fright: some news of a 
death, or an insult and a violent quarrel. Then it would all 
be clear.’
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘We know nothing. Have a care that none be let in to 
him. I beg you not to leave him till he wakes, father; and 
if he seems in danger call me, even in the middle of the 
night.’
    </p>
    <p>
     Before he left the old abbot bent again over the boy. He 
thought of the knight, his father, and the day when Ais 
pretty little yellow-head had been left here for schooling 
in the cloister, where they all took to him at once. He too 
had been glad to see him come. But in one thing Narziss 
had hit the mark: in no way did this boy resemble his 
father. Alas, how much grief there was in the world! How 
vain and useless all our strivings! Had he neglected the care 
of this poor boy ? Had he even given him the right confessor ? 
Was it in order that, in their house, no other should know 
this scholar so well as Narziss? Could Narziss help him - 
a novice; neither monk nor consecrated priest? Pie, whose 
thoughts and opinions seemed all so arrogant, so full, almost, 
of hate? And God alone knew if this Narziss had not him¬ 
self long been mishandled: God alone could tell if all his 
obedience were not a mask, if at heart he were not a mere 
heathen. He, Ae abbot, would have to answer for every- 
Aing that might one day come to Aese two young men.
    </p>
    <p>
     When Goldmund woke it was dark. His head swam, no 
thoughts came into it. He could feel himself lying on a bed, 
but where he knew not. He strove, and yet nothing came to 
him. How had he travelled here: from what strange coun¬ 
try of new knowledge? He had been in some far-off place, 
where he had seen some rare and glorious sights, terrible, 
and never to be forgotten. Yet now he was forgetting them 
all. When was it? What was Ais thing that had risen up 
before him, so dolorous, mighty, full of beauty, to fade out 
again? He strove to sec far down into himself, to Ae deeps
    </p>
    <p>
     53
    </p>
    <p>
     out of which this thing had come. What had it been? A 
covey of vain images swirled around him. He could see 
beasts’ heads, three heads of dogs, and caught a whiff of 
roses in his nostrils. What pain he had felt! He shut his eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
     The terrible pain I He fell asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
     Then he woke and saw the thing he sought, through a 
swiftly melting fog of dreams: saw the image, and hunched 
himself together in a pang of agony and joy. He could see - 
his eyes had been opened - the tall, shining woman, with 
full, red lips, her hair blown by the wind: his mother! And 
in that instant he heard a voice, or seemed to hear it, speak 
these words: ‘You have forgotten your childhood.’ He 
listened, thought; then remembered. Narziss’ voice. Nan 
ziss! In a flash it was all before his eyes, he could see it 
all, it was all known. Oh, mother - mother ! Mountains of 
rubbish had been levelled, oceans of forgetfulness dried up: 
from blue, shining eyes, like a queen, the lost woman smiled 
at him again, her image unutterably loved. ,
    </p>
    <p>
     Pater Anselm, who had fallen asleep in his chair, beside |; 
the bed, awoke. He had heard the sick boy stir and draw in ^
    </p>
    <p>
     a breath. Gently he rose: ‘Who’s there ? ’ asked Goldmund, |
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Don’t be scared. It’s I ~ Father Anselm. I’ll strike a | 
light.’ 1
    </p>
    <p>
     He set a flame to the wick; it lighted up his kind puckered \
    </p>
    <p>
     face. i
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘But am I sick?’questioned the boy. !.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘You fell into a .swoon, sonny. Give me your hand, and ; 
let me take your pulse. How do you feel yourself?’ •. j
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘Well, thanks, Pater Anselm. You are very kind to me. I j 
need nothing? I am only weary.’ _ j
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘To be sure you are weary. Soon you’ll drop off again. i 
Take a mouthful of spiced wine first, though. Here it is, j
    </p>
    <p>
     all ready waiting for you
    </p>
   </div>
  </body>
 </text>
</TEI>
