<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<TEI>
 <teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
   <titleStmt>
    <title>
     The Journey to The East
    </title>
    <author>
     Hermann Hesse
    </author>
    <year>
     1932
    </year>
    <genre>
     Novel
    </genre>
    <originalrlanguage>
     German
    </originalrlanguage>
    <source>
     https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.247218/page/n95/mode/2up
    </source>
    <originalfileformat>
     Plain text
    </originalfileformat>
   </titleStmt>
  </fileDesc>
 </teiHeader>
 <text>
  <body>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter one
    </head>
    <p>
     As I was destined to join in a great experience, as 
I have had the good fortune to belong to the League 
and have been allowed to be a participant in that 
unique journey, the wonder of which then had a 
meteor-like radiance, and later was forgotten so 
quickly, which, indeed, even fell into disrepute, I 
have decided to attempt a short description of this 
fabulous journey, a journey which since the days of 
Hugo and mad Roland, has not been attempted again 
until our remarkable times, the troubled, confused, 
and yet so very fertile times since the World War. 
I do not think that I am under any illusion about the 
difficulties of my attempt ; they are very great and 
are not only of a subjective nature, although these 
alone would be considerable. For not only do I no 
longer possess the tokens, mementos, documents and 
diaries relating to the journey, but in the difficult 
years of misfortune, sickness and deep affliction which 
have elapsed since then, a large number of my 
recollections have also vanished. As a result of the 
blows of Fate and continual discouragement, my 
memory as well as my confidence in these earlier
    </p>
    <p>
     5
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     vivid recollections have become impaired. But apart 
from these purely personal notes, I am handicapped 
because of my former vow to the League ; for 
although this vow permits unrestricted communica- 
tion of my personal experiences, it forbids any 
disclosures about the League itself. And even though 
the League seems to have had no visible existence 
for a long time and I have not seen any of its 
members again, no allurement or threat in the world 
would induce me to break my vow. On the contrary, 
if today or tomorrow I had to appear before a court- 
martial and was given the option of dying or divulg- 
ing the secret of the League, I would joyously seal 
my vow to the League with death.
    </p>
    <p>
     It can be noted here that since the travel diary 
of Count Keyserling, several books have appeared in 
which the authors, partly unconsciously, but also 
partly deliberately, have given the impression that 
they are brothers of the League and had taken part 
in the Journey to the East. Incidentally, even the 
adventurous travel accounts of Ossendowski come 
under this justifiable suspicion. But they all have 
nothing to do with the League and our Journey to 
the East, or at any rate, no more than ministers of 
a small sanctimonious sect have to do with the 
Saviour, the Apostles and the Holy Ghost to whom 
they refer for special favour and membership. Even 
if Count Keyserling really sailed round the world
    </p>
    <p>
     6
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     with ease, and if Ossendowski actually traversed the 
countries he described, yet their journeys were not 
remarkable and they discovered no new territory, 
whereas at certain stages of our Journey to the East, 
although the common-place aids of modem travel 
such as railways, steamers, telegraph, automobiles, 
aeroplanes, etc., were renounced, we penetrated into 
the heroic and magical. It was shortly after the 
World War, and the beliefs of the conquered nations 
were in an extraordinary state of unreality. There 
was a readiness to believe in things beyond reality 
even though only a few barriers were actually over- 
come and few advances made into the realm of a 
future psychiatry. Our journey at that time across 
the Moon Ocean to Famagusta under the leadership 
of Albert the Great, or say, the discovery of the 
Butterfly Island, twelve leagues beyond Zipangu, or 
the inspiring league ceremony at Rudiger’s grave — 
those were deeds and experiences which were allotted 
once only to people of our time and zone.
    </p>
    <p>
     I see that I am already coming up against one of 
the greatest obstacles in my account. The heights 
to which our deeds rose, the spiritual plane of 
experience to which they belong might be made 
proportionately more comprehensible to the reader if 
it were permitted to disclose to him the essence of 
the League’s secret. But a great deal, perhaps every- 
thing, will remain incredible and incomprehensible
    </p>
    <p>
     7
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     to him. The paradox alone must always be accepted 
that the seemingly impossible must continually be 
attempted. I agree with Siddhartha, our wise friend 
from the East, who once said : “ Words do not 
express thoughts very well ; everything immediately 
becomes a little different, a little distorted, a little 
foolish. And yet it also pleases me and seems right 
that what is of value and wisdom to one man seems 
nonsense to another.” Even centuries ago the mem- 
bers and historians of our League recognised and 
courageously faced up to this difficulty. One of the 
greatest of them gave expression to it in an immortal 
verse :
    </p>
    <p>
     “ He who travels far will often see things .
    </p>
    <p>
     Far removed from what he believed was Truth. 
When he talks about it in the fields at home,
    </p>
    <p>
     _ He is often accused of lying,
    </p>
    <p>
     V .r&gt; ' v . For the obdurate people will not believe
    </p>
    <p>
     What they do not see and distinctly feel. 
Inexperience, I believe.
    </p>
    <p>
     Will give little credence to my song.”
    </p>
    <p>
     This inexperience has also created the position 
where, now that publicity is being given to our 
journey which once roused thousands to ecstasy, it 
is not only forgotten but a real taboo is imposed 
upon its recollection. History is rich in examples of 
a similar kind. The whole of world history often
    </p>
    <p>
     8
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     seems to me nothing more than a picture-book which 
portrays humanity’s most powerful and senseless 
desire— the desire to forget. Does not each genera- 
tion, by means of suppression, concealment and 
ridicule, efface what the previous generation con- 
sidered most important ? Have we not just had the 
experience that a long, horrible, monstrous war has 
been forgotten, gainsaid, distorted and dismissed by 
all nations ? And now that they have had a short 
respite, are not the same nations trying to recall by 
means of exciting war novels what they themselves 
caused and endured a few years ago ? In the same 
way. the day of re-discovery will come for the deeds 
and sorrows of our League, which are now either 
forgotten or are a laughing-stock in the world, and
    </p>
    <p>
     my notes should make a small contribution towards 
it.
    </p>
    <p>
     One of the characteristics of the Journey to the 
East was that although the League aimed at quite 
definite, very lofty goals during this journey (they 
belong to the secret category and are therefore not
    </p>
    <p>
     communicable), yet every single participant could 
have his own private goals. Indeed, he had to have 
them ; for no one was included who did not have 
such private goals, and every single one of us, while 
appearing to share common ideals and goals and to 
fight under a common flag, carried his own fond 
childhood dream within his heart as a source of
    </p>
    <p>
     9
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     inner strength and comfort. My own goal for the 
journey, about which the President questioned me 
before my acceptance into the League, was a simple 
one, but many members of the League had set them- 
selves goals which, although I respected, I could not 
fully understand. For example, one of them was a 
treasure-seeker and he thought of nothing else but 
of winning a great treasure which he called “ Tao 
Still another had conceived the idea of capturing a 
certain snake to which he attributed magical powers 
and which he called Kundalini. My own journey and 
life-goal, which had coloured my dreams since my 
late boyhood, was to see the beautiful Princess 
Fatima and, if possible, to win her love.
    </p>
    <p>
     At the time that I had the good fortune to join 
the League — that is, immediately after the end of 
the World War — our country was full of saviours, 
prophets and disciples, of presentiments about the 
end of the world, or hopes for the dawn of a Third 
Empire. Shattered by the war, in despair as a result 
of deprivation and hunger, greatly disillusioned by the 
seeming futility of all the sacrifices in blood and 
goods, our people at that time were lured by many 
phantoms, but there were also many real spiritual 
advances. There were Bacchanalian dance societies 
and Anabaptist groups, there was one thing after 
another that seemed to point to what was wonderful 
and beyond the veil. There was also at that time a
    </p>
    <p>
     10
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     widespread leaning towards Indian, ancient Persian 
and other Eastern mysteries and religions, and all 
this gave most people the impression that our ancient 
League was one of the many newly-blossomed cults, 
and that after a few years it would also be partly 
forgotten, despised and decried. The faithful amongst 
its disciples cannot dispute this.
    </p>
    <p>
     How well do I remember the hour when, after the 
expiration of my probation year, I presented myself 
before the High Throne. I was given insight to the 
project of the Journey to the East, and after I had 
dedicated myself, body and soul, to this project, I 
was asked in a friendly way what I personally hoped 
to gain from this journey into the legendary realm. 
Although blushing somewhat, I confessed frankly 
and unhesitatingly to the assembled officials that it 
was my heart’s desire to be allowed to see Princess 
Fatima. The Speaker, interpreting the allusion, 
gently placed his hand on my head and uttered the 
formula which confirmed my admission as a member 
of the League. “Anima pia,” he said and bade me 
be constant in faith, courageous in danger, and to 
love my fellow-men. Well-schooled during my year’s 
probation, I took the oath, renounced the world and 
its superstitions and had the League ring placed on
    </p>
    <p>
     my finger to the words from one of the most beautiful 
chapters in our League’s history :
    </p>
    <p>
     11
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ On earth and in the air, in water and in fire.
    </p>
    <p>
     The spirits are subservient to him.
    </p>
    <p>
     His glance frightens and tames the wildest beasts. 
And even the anti-Christian must approach him 
with awe. . . . etc.”
    </p>
    <p>
     To my great pleasure, immediately on admission 
to the League, we novitiates were given insight to 
our prospects. For instance, on following the direc- 
tions of the officials to attach myself to one of the 
groups of ten people who were en route throughout 
the country to join the League’s expedition, one of 
the League’s secret s immediately became vividly clear 
to me. I realised that I had joined a pilgrimage to 
the East, seemingly a definite and single pilgrimage — 
but in reality, in its broadest sense, this expedition 
to the East was not only mine and now ; this pro- 
cession of believers and disciples had always and 
incessantly been moving towards the East, towards 
the Home of Light. Throughout the centuries it had 
been on the way, towards light and wonder, and each 
member, each group, indeed our whole host and its 
great pilgrimage, was only a wave in the eternal 
stream of human beings, of the eternal strivings of 
the human spirit towards the East, towards Home. 
The knowledge passed through my mind like a ray 
of light and immediately reminded me of a phrase 
which I had learned during my novitiate year, which 
had always pleased me immensely without my
    </p>
    <p>
     12
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     realising its full significance. It was a phrase by the
    </p>
    <p>
     poet Novalis, “ Where are we really going ? Always 
home ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     Meantime, our group had set off on its travels ; 
soon we encountered other groups, and the feeling 
of unity and a common goal gave us increasing 
happiness. Faithful to our instructions, we lived like 
pilgrims and made no use of those contrivances 
which spring into existence in a world illuded by 
money, number and time, and which drain life of its 
content ; mechanical contrivances such as railways, 
watches and the like came chiefly into this category. 
Another unanimously observed rule bade us visit and 
pay homage to all places and associations relating to 
the ancient history of our League and its faith. We 
visited and honoured all sacred places and monu- 
ments, churches and consecrated tombstones which 
we came across on our way ; chapels and altars were 
adorned with flowers ; ruins were honoured with 
songs or silent contemplation ; the dead were com- 
memorated with music and prayers. It was not 
unusual for us to be mocked at and disturbed by 
unbelievers, but it also happened often enough that 
priests blessed us and invited us to be their guests, 
that children enthusiastically joined us, learned our 
songs and saw us depart with tears in their eyes ; 
that an old man would show us forgotten monu- 
ments or tell us a legend about his district; that
    </p>
    <p>
     13
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     youths would walk with us part of the way and desire 
to join the League. The latter were given advice and 
apprised of the first rites and practices of novitiates. 
We were aware of the first wonders, partly through 
seeing them with our own eyes and partly through 
unexpected accounts and legends. One day, when I 
was still quite a new member, someone suddenly 
mentioned that the giant Agramant was a guest in
    </p>
    <p>
     our leaders’ tent, and was trying to persuade them
    </p>
    <p>
     to make their way across Africa in order to liberate
    </p>
    <p>
     some League members from Moorish captivity.
    </p>
    <p>
     Another time we saw the Goblin, the pitch-maker.
    </p>
    <p>
     the comforter, and we presumed that we should 
make our way towards the Blue Pot. However, the
    </p>
    <p>
     first amazing phenomenon which I saw with my own 
eyes was when we had stopped for prayer and rest 
at an old half-ruined Chapel in the region of 
Spaichendorf ; on the only undamaged wall of the 
Chapel there was painted a very large picture of 
Saint Christopher, and on his shoulder, small, and 
half-faded from old age, sat the Child Saviour. The 
leaders, as was sometimes their custom, did not 
simply propose the direction we should take, but 
invited us all to give our opinion, for the Chapel lay 
at a three-direction signpost and we had the choice. 
Only a few of us expressed a wish or gave advice, 
but one person pointed to the left and urgently 
requested that we should choose this path. We were
    </p>
    <p>
     14
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     all silent then and waited for our leaders’ decision, 
when Saint Christopher raised his arm holding the 
long, thick staff and pointed to the left where our 
brother desired to go. We all watched this in silence, 
and silently the leaders turned to the left and went 
along this path, and we all followed with the utmost 
pleasure.
    </p>
    <p>
     We had not been long on our way in Swabia when 
a power which we had not thought about became 
noticeable. We had felt its influence strongly for 
rather a long time without quite knowing whether it 
was friendly or hostile. It was the power of the 
guardians of the crown who, since olden times, had 
preserved the memory and inheritance of the Hohen- 
staufen in that country. I do not know whether our 
leaders knew more about it and had any instructions 
regarding it. I only know that we received many 
exhortations and warnings from them, such as on 
the hill on the way to Bopfingen where we met a 
hoary old warrior ; he shook his grey head with his 
eyes closed and disappeared again without leaving 
any trace. Our leaders took notice of the warning ; 
we turned back and did not go to Bopfingen. On 
the other hand, it happened in the neighbourhood 
of Urach that an ambassador of the crown guardians 
appeared in our leaders’ tent as if sprung from out 
of the ground, and with promises and threats tried 
to induce them to put our expedition at the service
    </p>
    <p>
     15
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     of the Staufen, and indeed to make preparations for 
the conquest of Sicily. When the leaders firmly 
refused this demand, he said he would put a dreadful 
curse on the League and on our expedition. And yet 
I am only reporting what was whispered among our- 
selves ; the leaders themselves did not mention a word 
about it. Still, it seems possible that it was our 
uncertain relationship with the guardians of the 
crown which, for a long time, gave our League the 
unmerited reputation of being a secret society for the 
restoration of the monarchy.
    </p>
    <p>
     On one occasion I also had the experience of 
seeing one of my comrades entertain doubts ; he 
renounced his vow and relapsed into disbelief. He 
was a young man whom I had liked very much. His 
personal reason for joining the expedition to the 
East was his desire to see the coffin of the prophet 
Mohammed from which, it had been said, he could 
by magic rise freely into the air. In one of those 
Swabian or Alemannic small towns where we stopped 
for a few days, because an opposition of Saturn and 
the moon checked our progress, this unfortunate man, 
who had seemed sad and restless for some time, met 
one of his former teachers to whom he had remained 
very attached since his schooldays. This teacher was 
successful in again making the young man see our 
cause in the light which it appears to unbelievers. 
After one of these visits to the teacher, the poor man
    </p>
    <p>
     16
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     came back to our camp in a dreadful state of excite- 
ment and with a distorted countenance. He made a 
commotion outside the leaders’ tent, and when the 
Speaker came out he shouted at him angrily that he 
had had enough of this ridiculous expedition which 
would never bring us to the East ; he had had enough 
of the journey being interrupted for days because of 
stupid astrological considerations ; he was more than 
tired of idleness, of childish wanderings, of floral 
ceremonies, of attaching importance to magic, of the 
intermingling of life and poetry ; he would throw the 
ring at the leaders’ feet, take his leave and return by 
the trusty railway to his home and his useful work. 
It was an ugly and lamentable sight. We were filled 
with shame and yet at the same time pitied the mis- 
guided man. The Speaker listened to him kindly, 
stooped with a smile for the discarded ring, and said 
in a quiet, cheerful voice which must have put the 
blustering man to shame : “You have said good-bye 
to us and want to return to the railway, to common- 
sense and useful work. You have said good-bye to 
the League, to the expedition to the East, good-bye 
to magic, to floral festivals, to poetry. You are 
absolved from your vow.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “Also from the vow of silence ? ” cried the deserter.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes, also from the vow of silence,” answered the 
Speaker. “Remember, you vowed to keep silent 
about the secret of the League to unbelievers. As we
    </p>
    <p>
     17
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     see you have forgotten the secret, you will not be 
able to pass it on to anyone.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I have forgotten something ! I have forgotten 
nothing,” cried the young man, but became uncertain, 
and as the Speaker turned his back on him and with- 
drew to the tent, he suddenly ran quickly away.
    </p>
    <p>
     We were sorry, but the days were crammed so full 
with events that I quickly forgot him. But it hap- 
pened some time later, when none of us thought 
about him any more, that we heard the inhabitants 
of several villages and towns through which we 
passed, talk about this same youth. A young man 
had been there (and they described him accurately 
and mentioned his name) who had been looking for 
us everywhere. First he had said that he belonged to 
us, had stayed behind on the journey and had lost 
his way. Then he began to weep and stated that he 
had been unfaithful to us and had run away, but 
now he realised that he could no longer live outside 
the League ; he wished to, and indeed must, find us 
in order to go down on his knees before the leaders 
and beg to be forgiven. We heard this tale told again 
here, there, and everywhere ; wherever we went, the 
wretched man had just been there. We asked the 
Speaker what he thought about it and what would be 
the outcome. “ I do not think that he will find us, 
said the Speaker briefly. And he did not find us. We
    </p>
    <p>
     did not see him again.
    </p>
    <p>
     18
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Once, when one of the leaders had drawn me into 
a confidential conversation, I gathered courage and 
asked him how things stood with this renegade 
brother. After all, he was penitent and was looking 
for us, I said ; we ought to help him redeem his 
error. No doubt, he would in the future be the most 
loyal member of the League. The leader said : “ We 
should be happy if he did find his way back to us, 
but we cannot aid him. He has made it very difficult 
for himself to have faith again. I fear that he would
    </p>
    <p>
     not see and recognise us even if we passed close by 
him ; he has become blind. Repentance alone does 
not help. Grace cannot be bought with repentance ; 
it cannot be bought at all. A similar thing has. 
already happened to many other people ; great and 
famous men have shared the same fate as this young 
man. Once in their youth the light shone for them ; 
they saw the light and followed the star, but
    </p>
    <p>
     then came reason and the mockery of the world ; 
then came faint-heartedness and apparent failure ; 
then came weariness and disillusionment, and so they 
lost their way again, they became blind again. Some 
of them have spent the rest of their lives looking for 
us again, but could not find us. They have then told 
the world that our League is only a pretty legend 
and people should not be misled by it. Others have 
become our deadly enemies and have abused and 
harmed the League in every possible way ”
    </p>
    <p>
     19
    </p>
    <p>
     Wood
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     There were wonderful festive days each time we 
encountered other parties of the League’s hosts on 
our way ; sometimes we then formed a camp of 
hundreds, even thousands. The expedition did not, 
in fact, proceed in any fixed order with participants 
moving in the same direction in more or less closed 
columns. On the contrary, numerous groups were 
simultaneously on the way, each following their own 
leaders and their own stars, each one always ready 
to merge into a greater unit and belong to it for a 
time, but always no less ready to move on again 
separately. Some went on their way quite alone. I 
also walked alone at times, whenever some sign or 
call tempted me to go my own way.
    </p>
    <p>
     I remember a select little group with which we 
travelled and camped together for some days ; this 
group had undertaken to liberate some captive 
League brothers and the Princess Isabella from the 
hands of the Moors. It was said that they were in 
possession of Hugo’s horn, and among them were 
my friends the poet Lauscher and the artists Klingsor 
and Paul Klee ; they spoke of nothing else but Africa 
and the captured princess, and their Bible was the 
book of the deeds of Don Quixote, in whose honour 
they thought of making their way across Spain.
    </p>
    <p>
     It was very pleasant whenever we met one of these 
groups, to attend their feasts and devotions and to 
invite them to ours, to hear about their deeds and
    </p>
    <p>
     20
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     plans, to bless and know them on parting ; they went 
their way, we went ours. Each one of them had his 
own dream, his wish, his secret heart’s desire, and 
yet they all flowed together in the great stream and 
all belonged to each other, shared the same reverence 
and the same faith, and had made the same vow ! 
I met Jup, the magician, who proposed to gather the 
fortune of his life in Kashmir ; I met Collofine, the 
sorcerer, quoting his favourite passage from the 
Adventures of Simplicissimus ; I met Louis the 
Terrible, who dreamt of planting an olive-grove in 
the Holy Land and keeping slaves. He went arm-in- 
arm with Anselm, who was in search of the purple 
iris of his childhood. I met and loved Ninon, known 
as “ the foreigner.” Dark eyes gleamed beneath her 
black hair. She was jealous of Fatima, the princess 
of my dreams, and yet she was probably Fatima 
herself without my knowing it. And as we moved 
on. so had once pilgrims, emperors and crusaders 
moved on to liberate the Saviour’s grave, or to study 
Arabian magic ; Spanish knights had travelled this 
way, as well as German scholars, Irish monks and 
French poets.
    </p>
    <p>
     I, whose calling was really only that of a violinist 
and story-teller, was responsible for the provision of 
music for our group, and I then discovered how a 
long time devoted to small details exalts us and 
increases our strength. I did not only play the violin
    </p>
    <p>
     21
    </p>
    <p>
     9 / - &gt;'
    </p>
    <p>
     A •
    </p>
    <p>
     _ -
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     and conduct our choirs, but also collected old songs 
and chorals. I wrote motets and madrigals for six 
and eight voices and practised them. But I will not 
give you details of these^^^-—
    </p>
    <p>
     I was very fond of many of my comrades and 
leaders, but not one of them subsequently occupied 
my thoughts as much as Leo, while at that time he 
was apparently hardly noticed. Leo was one of our 
servants (who were naturally volunteers, as we 
were). He helped to carry the luggage and was often 
assigned to the personal service of the Speaker. This 
unaffected man had something so pleasing, so 
unobtrusively winning about him that everyone loved 
him. He did his work gaily, usually sang or whistled 
as he went along, was never seen except when needed 
— in fact, an ideal servant. Furthermore, all animals 
were attached to him. We nearly always had some 
dog or other with us which joined us on account of 
Leo ; he could tame birds and attract butterflies to 
him. It was his desire for Solomon’s key which would 
enable him to understand the language of the birds 
that had drawn him to the East. This servant Leo 
worked in a very simple and natural manner, 
friendly in an unassuming way, alongside the many 
forms of our League, which, without doing harm 
to the value and sincerity of the League, had 
within them something exalting, something singular, 
solemn, or fantastic. What makes my account
    </p>
    <p>
     22
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     particularly difficult is the great disparity in my 
individual recollections. I have already said that 
sometimes we marched along only as a small group ; 
sometimes we formed a troop or even an army, but 
sometimes I remained in a district with only a few 
friends, or even quite alone, without tents, without 
leaders and without a Speaker. My tale becomes 
even more difficult because we not only wandered 
through Space, but also through Time. We moved 
towards the East, but we also travelled into the 
Middle Ages and the Golden Age ; we roamed 
through Italy or Switzerland, but at times we also 
spent the night in the 10th century and dwelt with 
the patriarchs or the fairies. During the times I 
remained alone, I often found again places and 
people of my own past. I wandered with my former 
betrothed along the edges of the forest of the Upper 
Rhine, caroused with friends of my youth in 
Tubingen, in Basle or in Florence, or I was a boy 
and went with my school-friends to catch butterflies 
or to watch an otter, or my company consisted of the 
beloved characters of my books; Almansor and 
Parsifal, Witiko or Goldmund rode by my side, or 
Sancho Panza, or we were guests at the Barmekides. 
When I found my way back to our group in some 
valley or another, heard the League’s songs and 
camped by the leaders’ tents, it was immediately clear 
to me that my excursion into my childhood and my
    </p>
    <p>
     23
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     ride with Sancho belonged essentially to this journey. 
For our goal was not only the East, or rather the 
East was not only a country and something geo- 
graphical, but it was the home and youth of the soul, 
it was everywhere and nowhere, it was the union 
of all times. Yet I was only aware of this for a 
moment, and therein lay the reason for my great 
happiness at that time. Later, when I had lost this 
happiness again, I clearly understood these con- 
nections without deriving the slightest benefit or 
comfort from them. When something precious and 
irretrievable is lost, we have the feeling of having 
awakened from a dream. In my case this feeling is 
strangely correct, for my happiness did indeed arise 
from the same secret as the happiness in dreams ; it 
arose from the freedom to experience everything 
imaginable simultaneously, to exchange outward and 
inward easily, to move Time and Space about like 
scenes in a theatre. And as we League brothers 
travelled throughout the world without motor-cars 
or ships, as we conquered the war-shattered world 
by our faith and transformed it into Paradise, we 
creatively brought the past, the future and the 
fictitious into the present moment.
    </p>
    <p>
     And again and again, in Swabia, at Bodensee, in 
Switzerland, everywhere, we met people who under- 
stood us, or were in some way thankful that we and 
our League and our Journey to the East existed.
    </p>
    <p>
     24
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Amid the tramways and banks of Zurich we came 
across Noah’s Ark guarded by several old dogs which 
all had the same name, and which were bravely 
guided across the shallow waters of a calm period by 
Hans C. to Noah’s descendant, to the friend of the 
arts. We went to Winterthur, down into Stocklin’s 
Magic Closet ; we were guests in the Chinese Temple 
where the incense holders gleamed beneath the 
bronze Maja and the black king played the flute 
sweetly to the vibrating tone of the temple gong. 
And at the foot of the Sun Mountains we came across 
Suon Mali, a colony of the King of Siam, where, 
amongst the stone and brazen Buddhas, we offered 
up our libations and incense as grateful guests.
    </p>
    <p>
     One of the most beautiful experiences was the 
League’s celebration in Bremgarten ; the magic circle 
surrounded us closely there. Received by Max and 
Tilli, the lords of the castle, we heard Othmar play 
Mozart on the grand-piano in the lofty hall. We 
found the grounds occupied by parrots and other 
talking birds. We heard the fairy Armida sing at 
the fountain. With blown locks the heavy head of 
the astrologer Longus nodded by the side of the 
beloved countenance of Henry of Ofterdingen. In 
the garden, the peacocks screeched, and Louis con- 
versed in Spanish with Puss in Boots, while Hans 
Resom, shaken after his peeps into the masked game 
of life, vowed he wbuld go on a pilgrimage to the
    </p>
    <p>
     25
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     grave of Charles the Great. It was one of the 
triumphant periods of our journey ; we had brought 
the magic wave with us ; it cleansed everything. 
The native paid homage on his knees to beauty, the 
lord of the castle produced a poem which dealt with 
our evening activities. The animals from the forest 
lurked close to the castle walls, and in the river the 
gleaming fishes moved in lively swarms and were fed 
with cakes and wine. w £'" ^ / — / ' t 
The best of these experiences really worth relating 
are those which reflect the spirit of it. My description 
of them seems poor and perhaps foolish, but everyone 
who participated in and celebrated the days at Brem- 
garten would confirm every single detail and supple- 
ment them with hundreds which are more beautiful. I 
shall always remember how the peacocks’ tails shim- 
mered when the moon rose amongst the tall trees, 
and on the shady bank the emerging mermaids 
gleamed fresh and silvery amongst the rocks ; how 
Don Quixote stood alone under the chestnut-tree by 
the fountain and held his first night-watch while the 
last Roman candles of the firework display fell so 
softly over the castle’s turrets in the moonlight, and 
my colleague Pablo, adorned with roses, played the 
Persian reed-pipe to the girls. Oh, which of us ever 
thought that the magic circle would break up so 
soon ! That almost all of us— and also I, even I— 
should again lose myself in the soundless deserts of
    </p>
    <p>
     26
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     mapped out reality, just like officials and shop- 
assistants who, after a party or a Sunday outing, 
adapt themselves again to everyday business life !
    </p>
    <p>
     In those days none of us was capable of such 
thoughts. From the castle’s turrets of Bremgarten, 
the fragrance of lilac entered my bedroom. I heard 
the river flowing beyond the trees. I climbed out of 
the window in the depth of the night, intoxicated 
with happiness and yearning. I stole past the knight 
on guard and the sleeping banqueters down to the 
river-bank, to the flowing waters, to the white, 
gleaming mermaids. They took me down with them 
into the cool, moonlit crystal world of their home, 
where they played dreamily with the crowns and 
golden chains from their treasure-chambers. It 
seemed to me that I spent months in the sparkling 
depths and when I emerged and swam ashore, 
thoroughly chilled, Pablo’s reed-pipe was still to be 
heard from the garden far away, and the moon was 
still high in the sky. I saw Leo playing with two 
white poodles, his clever, boyish face radiating 
happiness. I found Longus sitting in the wood. On 
his knees was a book of parchment in which he was 
writing Greek and Hebrew characters ; dragons flew 
out of the letters, and coloured snakes reared them- 
selves. He did not look at me ; he went on painting, 
absorbed in his coloured snake-writing. For a long 
time I looked over his bent shoulders into the book.
    </p>
    <p>
     27
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     I saw the snakes and dragons emerge from his 
writing, whirl about and silently disappear into the 
dark wood. “ Longus,” I said to him softly, “ dear 
friend ! ” He did not hear me, my world was far 
from his. And quite apart, under the moonlit trees, 
Anselm wandered about with an iris in his hand ; 
lost in thought, he stared and smiled at the flower’s 
purple calyx.
    </p>
    <p>
     Something that 1 had observed several times during 
our journey, without having fully considered it, 
impressed me again during the days at Bremgarten, 
strangely and rather painfully. There were amongst 
us many artists, painters, musicians and poets. 
Ardent Klingsor was there and restless Hugo Wolf, 
taciturn Lauscher and vivacious Brentano — but 
however animated and lovable the personalities of 
these artists were, yet without exception their 
imaginary characters were more animated, more 
beautiful, happier and certainly finer and more real 
than the poets and creators themselves. Pablo sat 
there with his flute in enchanting innocence and joy, 
but his poet slipped away like a shadow to the river- 
bank, half-transparent in the moonlight, seeking 
solitude. Stumbling and rather drunk, Hoffman ran 
here and there amongst the guests, talking a great 
deal, small and elfish, and he also, like all of them, 
was only half-real, only half there, not quite solid.
    </p>
    <p>
     28
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     not quite real. At the same time, the archivist Lind- 
horst, playing at dragons for a joke, continually 
breathed fire and discharged energy like an auto- 
mobile. I asked the servant Leo why it was that 
artists sometimes appeared to be only half-alive, 
while their creations seemed so irrefutably alive. 
Leo looked at me, surprised at my question. Then 
he released the poodle he was holding in his arms 
and said : “ It is just the same with mothers. When 
they have borne their children and given them their 
milk and beauty and strength, they themselves
    </p>
    <p>
     become invisible, and no one asks about them any 
more.”
    </p>
    <p>
     But that is sad,” I said, without really thinking 
very much about it.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I do not think it is more sad than all other 
things,” said Leo. “ Perhaps it is sad and yet also 
beautiful. The law ordains that it shall be so.”
    </p>
    <p>
     " The law ? ” I asked curiously. “ Which law is 
that, Leo ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ It is the law of service. He who wishes to live
    </p>
    <p>
     long must serve, but he who wishes to rule does not 
live long.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Then why do so many strive to rule ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Because they do not understand. There are few 
who are bom to be masters ; they remain happy and 
healthy. But all the others who have only become 
masters through endeavour, end in nothing.”
    </p>
    <p>
     29
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ In what nothing, Leo ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ For example, in the sanitoria.”
    </p>
    <p>
     I understood little about it and yet the words 
remained in my memory and left me with a feeling 
that this Leo knew all kinds of things, that he 
perhaps knew more than us, who were ostensibly his
    </p>
    <p>
     masters.
    </p>
    <p>
     30
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter two
    </head>
    <p>
     Each participant in this unforgettable journey had 
his own ideas as to what made our faithful Leo 
suddenly decide to leave us in the middle of the 
dangerous gorge of Morbio Inferiore. It was only 
very much later that I began in some measure to 
suspect and review the circumstances and deeper 
significance of this occurrence. It also seemed that 
this apparently incidental but in reality extremely 
important event, the disappearance of Leo, was in 
no way an accident, but a link in that chain of events 
through which the eternal enemy sought to bring 
disaster to our undertaking. On that cool autumn 
morning when it was discovered that our servant Leo 
was missing and that all search for him remained 
fruitless, I was certainly not the only one who, for 
the first time, had a feeling of impending disaster 
and menacing destiny.
    </p>
    <p>
     However, for the moment, this was the position. 
After we had boldly crossed half Europe and a 
portion of the Middle Ages, we camped in a very 
narrow rocky valley, a wild mountain gorge on the 
Italian border, and looked for the inexplicably
    </p>
    <p>
     31
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     missing Leo. The longer we looked for him and tha 
more our hopes of finding him again dwindled during 
the course of the day, the more were we oppressed 
by the thought that it was not only the question of a 
popular, pleasant man amongst our servants who 
had either met with an accident or run away or had 
been captured by an enemy, but that this was the 
beginning of trouble, the first indication of a storm 
which would break over us. We spent the whole of 
the day, far into the twilight, searching for Leo. The 
whole of the gorge was explored, and while these 
exertions made us weary, and a feeling of hopeless- 
ness and futility grew amongst us all, it was very 
strange and uncanny how from hour to hour the 
missing servant seemed to increase in importance and
    </p>
    <p>
     our loss created difficulties. It was not only that each 
pilgrim, and without doubt the whole of the staff, 
were worried about the handsome, pleasant and 
willing youth, but it seemed that the more certain 
his loss became, the more indispensable he seemed ; 
without Leo, his handsome face, his good humour 
and his songs, without his enthusiasm for our great
    </p>
    <p>
     undertaking, the undertaking itself seemed in some 
mysterious way to lose meaning. At least, that is how 
it affected me. Despite all the strain and many minor 
disillusionments during the previous months of the 
journey, I had never had a moment of inner weak- 
ness, of serious doubt ; no successful general, no bird
    </p>
    <p>
     32
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     in the swallows’ flight to Egypt, could be more sure 
of his goal, of his mission, of the rightness of his 
actions and aspirations than I was on this journey. 
But now, in this fateful place, while I continually 
heard the calls and signals of our sentinels during 
the whole of the blue and golden October day, and 
awaited again and again with growing excitement the 
arrival of a report, only to suffer disappointment and 
to gaze at perplexed faces, I had feelings of sadness 
and doubt for the first time. The stronger these 
feelings became, the clearer it seemed to me that it 
was not only that I had lost faith in finding Leo again, 
but everything now seemed to become unreliable and 
doubtful ; the value and meaning of everything was 
threatened : our comradeship, our faith, our vow, 
our Journey to the East, our whole life.
    </p>
    <p>
     Even if I was mistaken in presuming that we all 
had these feelings, indeed even if I was subsequently 
mistaken about my own feelings and inner experi- 
ences and many things which were in reality 
experienced much later and erroneously attributed to 
that day, there still remains, despite everything, the 
strange fact about Leo’s luggage. Quite apart from 
all personal moods, this was, in fact, rather strange, 
fantastic, and an increasing source of worry. Even 
during this day in the Morbio gorge, even during 
our eager search for the missing man, first one man, 
then another missed something important, something
    </p>
    <p>
     33
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     indispensable from the luggage which could not be 
found anywhere. It appeared that every missing 
article must have been in Leo’s luggage, and although 
Leo, like all the rest of us, had only carried the usual 
linen haversack on his back, just one bag amongst 
about thirty others, it seemed that in this one lost 
bag there were all the really important things which 
we carried with us on our journey. And although it 
is a well-known human weakness that a thing at the 
time we miss it has an exaggerated value and seems 
less dispensable than the things we have, and 
although the loss of many of the articles which 
troubled us so much in the Morbio gorge did, in fact, 
turn up again later, or finally did not prove so indis- 
pensable — yet, despite all this, it is unfortunately true 
that we did at that time, with quite justifiable alarm, 
confirm the loss of a whole series of extremely
    </p>
    <p>
     important things.
    </p>
    <p>
     The further extraordinary and singular thing was
    </p>
    <p>
     this : the objects that were missing, whether they 
appeared again later or not, assumed their importance 
by degrees, and gradually all the things believed lost, 
which we had wrongly missed so much and to which 
we had mistakenly attached so much importance, 
turned up again in our stores. In order to express 
here quite clearly what was true yet altogether 
inexplicable, it must be said that during the course 
of our further journey, tools, valuables, cards and
    </p>
    <p>
     34
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     documents which were all lost seemed, to our shame, 
to be indispensable. Quite frankly, it seemed as if 
each one of us stretched his entire imagination to 
persuade himself of terrible, irreplaceable losses, as 
if each one endeavoured to conceive as lost that which 
was most important to him and to mourn over it ; 
with one it was the passports, with another the maps, 
with another it was the Letter of Credit to the 
Caliph ; it was this thing with one, that thing with 
another. And although in the end it was clear that 
one article after the other which was believed lost 
was either not lost at all or was unimportant or dis- 
pensable, there did remain one single thing that was 
really valuable, an inestimably important, absolutely 
fundamental and indispensable document that was 
really indisputably lost. But now opinions were 
ineffectually exchanged as to whether this document, 
which had disappeared with the servant Leo, had 
really been in our luggage. There was complete 
agreement about the great value of this document 
and that its loss was irreplaceable, and yet how few 
of us (amongst them myself) could declare with cer- 
tainty that this document had been taken with us on 
the journey. One man asserted that a similar docu- 
ment had certainly been carried in Leo’s linen bag ; 
this was not the original document at all, but natur- 
ally only a copy ; others declared that it had never 
been intended to take either the document itself or a
    </p>
    <p>
     35
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     copy on the journey, as this would have made a 
mockery of the whole meaning of our journey. This 
led to heated arguments and further demonstrated 
that there were various completely conflicting opinions 
about the whereabouts of the original (it was 
immaterial whether we only had the copy and 
whether we had lost it or not). The document, it was 
declared, was deposited with the government in 
Kyffhauser. No, said another, it lies buried in the 
urn which contains the ashes of our deceased master.
    </p>
    <p>
     Nonsense, said still another, the League document 
was drawn up by the master in the original characters 
known only to himself and it was burned with the 
master’s corpse at his behest. Enquiries regarding 
the original document were meaningless, because
    </p>
    <p>
     after the master’s death it was not possible for anyone 
to read it. But it was certainly necessary to ascertain 
where the four (some said six) translations of the 
original document were, which were made during the 
master’s lifetime under his supervision. It was said 
that Chinese, Greek, Hebrew and Latin translations 
existed, and they were deposited in the four old
    </p>
    <p>
     capitals. Many other opinions and views were 
expressed ; many clung obstinately to them, others 
were convinced first by one then by another opposing 
argument, and then soon changed their minds again. 
In brief, from that time, certainty and unity no
    </p>
    <p>
     36
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     longer existed in our community, although the great 
idea still kept us together.
    </p>
    <p>
     How well do I remember those first disputes ! 
They were something so new and unheard-of in our 
hitherto perfectly united League. They were con- 
ducted with respect and politeness — at least at the 
beginning. At first they led neither to fierce conflicts 
nor personal reproaches or insults — at first we were 
still an inseparable, united brotherhood throughout 
the world. I still hear their voices, I still see our 
camping ground where the first of these debates was 
conducted. I see the golden autumn leaves falling 
here and there amongst the unusually serious faces. 
I see one on a knee, another lying on a hat. I 
listened, feeling more and more distressed and fear- 
ful, but amidst all the exchange of opinions I was 
inwardly quite sure of my belief, sadly sure ; namely, 
that the original, genuine document had been in Leo’s 
bag, and that it had disappeared and was lost with 
him. However gloomy this belief might be, still it 
was a belief. It was a firm one and gave me a feeling 
of certainty. At that time I truly thought that I would 
willingly exchange this belief for a more hopeful one. 
Only later, when I had lost this sad oelief and was 
susceptible to all and sundry opinions, did I realise 
what I had possessed in my belief.
    </p>
    <p>
     I see that the tale cannot be told in this way. But 
how can it be told, this tale of a unique journey, of
    </p>
    <p>
     37
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     a unique communion of minds, of such a wonderfully 
exalted and spiritual life ? I should like so very 
much, as one of the last survivors of our community, 
to save some records of our great cause. I feel like 
the old surviving servant of perhaps one of the 
Paladins of Charles the Great, who recalls a stirring 
series of deeds and wonders, the images and memories 
of which will disappear with him if he is not success- 
ful in passing some of them on to posterity by means 
of word or picture, tale or song. But through what 
expedient is it possible for the story of the Journey 
to the East to be told ? I do not know. Already this 
first endeavour, this attempt begun with the best 
intentions, leads me into the boundless and incom- 
prehensible. I simply wanted to try to depict what 
has remained in my memory of the course of events 
and individual details of our Journey to the East. 
Nothing seemed more simple. And now, when I have 
hardly related anything, I am brought to a halt by a 
single small episode which I had not originally 
thought of at all, the episode of Leo’s disappearance. 
Instead of a fabric, I hold in my hands a bundle of a 
thousand knotted threads which would occupy 
hundreds of hands for years to disentangle and 
straighten out, even if every thread did not become 
terribly brittle and break between the fingers as soon 
as it is handled and gently drawn.
    </p>
    <p>
     38
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     I imagine that every historian is similarly affected 
when he begins to record the events of some period 
and wishes to portray them sincerely. Where is the 
centre of events, the common standpoint around 
which they revolve and which gives them cohesion ? 
In order that something like cohesion, something like 
causality, that some kind of meaning might ensue 
and that it can in some way be narrated, the historian 
must invent units, a hero, a nation, an idea, and he 
must allow to happen to this invented unit what has 
in reality happened to the nameless.
    </p>
    <p>
     If it is so difficult to relate connectedly a number of 
events which have really taken place and have been 
attested, it is in my case much more difficult, for 
everything becomes questionable as soon as I con- 
sider it closely, everything slips away and dissolves, 
just as our community, the strongest in the world, 
has been able to dissolve. There is no unit, no centre, 
no point around which the wheel revolves.
    </p>
    <p>
     Our Journey to the East and our League, the basis 
of our community, has been the most important 
thing, indeed the only important thing in my life, 
compared with which my own individual life has 
appeared completely unimportant. And now that I 
want to hold fast to and describe this most important 
thing, or at least something of it, everything is only 
a mass of separate fragmentary pictures which has 
been reflected in something, and this something is
    </p>
    <p>
     39
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     myself, and this self, this mirror, whenever I have 
gazed into it, has proved to be nothing but the upper- 
most surface of a glass plane. I put my pen away 
with the sincere intention and hope of continuing 
tomorrow or some other time, or rather to begin
    </p>
    <p>
     anew, but at the back of my intention and hope, at 
the back of my really tremendous urge to relate our 
story, there remains a dreadful doubt. It is the doubt 
that arose during the search for Leo in the valley 
of Morbio. This doubt does not only ask the ques-
    </p>
    <p>
     tion, “ Is your story capable of being told ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     It also
    </p>
    <p>
     asks the question, “ Was it possible to experience 
it ? ” We recall examples of participants in the 
World War who, although by no means short of
    </p>
    <p>
     facts and attested stories, must at times have enter-
    </p>
    <p>
     tained the same doubts.
    </p>
    <p>
     40
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter three
    </head>
    <p>
     Since I wrote the foregoing, I have pondered over 
my project again and again and tried to find a way 
out of my difficulty. I have not found a solution. I 
am still confronted by chaos. But I have vowed not 
to give in, and in the moment of making this vow 
a happy memory passed through my mind like a ray 
of sunshine. It was similar, it seemed to me, quite 
similar to how I felt when we commenced our 
expedition ; then also did we undertake something 
apparently impossible, then also did we apparently 
travel in the dark, not knowing our direction and not 
having the slightest prospects. Yet we had within us 
something stronger than reality or probability, and 
that was faith in the meaning and necessity of our 
action. I shuddered at the recollection of this senti- 
ment, and at the moment of this blissful shudder,
    </p>
    <p>
     everything became clear, everything seemed possible 
again.
    </p>
    <p>
     Whatever happens, I have decided to exercise my 
will. Even if I have to re-commence my difficult story 
ten times, a hundred times, and always arrive at the 
same cul-de-sac, just the same I will begin again a
    </p>
    <p>
     41
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     hundred times. If I cannot assemble the pictures into 
a significant whole again, I will present each single 
fragment as faithfully as possible. And as far as it is 
now still possible, I will be mindful of the first prin- 
ciple of our great period, never to rely on and let 
myself be disconcerted by reason, always to know 
that faith is stronger than so-called reality.
    </p>
    <p>
     In the meantime, I did make a sincere attempt to 
approach my goal in a practical and sensible manner. 
I went to see a friend of my youth who lives in this 
town and is editor of a newspaper. His name is 
Lukas. He had taken part in the World War and 
had published a book about it which had a large 
circulation. Lukas received me in a friendly manner. 
He was obviously pleased to see a former school- 
friend again. I had two long conversations with him.
    </p>
    <p>
     I tried to make him understand my position. I 
scorned all evasion. I told him frankly that I was a 
participant in that great enterprise of which he must 
also have heard, in the so-called “Journey to the 
East,” or the League expedition, or whatever it was 
then described as by the public. Oh yes, he smiled 
ironically, he certainly remembered it. In his cycle 
of friends, this singular episode was mostly called, 
perhaps somewhat disrespectfully, “the Childrens 
Crusade.” This movement was not taken quite 
seriously in his circle. It had indeed been compared
    </p>
    <p>
     42
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     with some kind of theosophical movement or brother- 
hood. Just the same, they had been very surprised 
at the periodic successes of the undertaking. They 
had read with due respect about the courageous 
journey through Upper Swabia, of the triumph at 
Bremgarten, of the surrender of the Tessin mountain 
village, and had at times wondered whether the 
movement would like to place itself at the service 
of a republican government. Then, to be sure, the 
matter apparently petered out. Several of the former 
leaders left the movement ; indeed, in some way they 
seemed to be ashamed of it and no longer wished to 
remember it. News about it came through very 
sparingly and it was always strangely contradictory, 
and so the whole matter was just placed aside ad acta 
and forgotten like so many eccentric political, 
religious or artistic movements of those post-war 
years. At that time so many prophets sprang up, so 
many secret societies with Messianic hopes appeared 
and then disappeared again leaving no trace.
    </p>
    <p>
     His point of view was clear, it was that of a well- 
meaning sceptic. All others who had heard its story, 
but had not themselves taken part in it, probably 
thought the same about the League and the Journey 
to the East. It was not for me to convert Lukas, but 
I gave him some corrected information ; for instance, 
that our League was in no way an off -shoot of the 
post-war years, but that it had extended throughout
    </p>
    <p>
     43
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     the whole of world history, sometimes, to be sure, 
under the surface, but in an unbroken line, that even 
certain phases of the World War were nothing else 
but stages in the history of our League ; further, that 
Zoroaster, Lao Tse, Plato, Xenophon, Pythagoras, 
Albertus Magnus, Don Quixote, Tristram Shandy, 
Novalis and Baudelaire were co-founders and 
brothers of our League. He smiled exactly in the 
way that I expected.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Well,” I said, “ I have not come here to instruct 
you, but to learn from you. It is my passionate desire 
to write, perhaps not a history of the League (even 
a whole army of well-equipped scholars would not 
be in a position to do this), but to tell quite simply 
the story of our journey. But I am quite unsuccessful 
in even approaching the subject. It is not a question 
of literary ability ; I think I have this. Moreover, I 
have no ambitions in this respect. No, it is because 
the reality that I once experienced, together with my 
comrades, exists no longer, and although its memories 
are the most precious and vivid ones that I possess, 
they seem so far away, they are composed of such a 
different kind of fabric, that it seems as if they 
originated on other stars in other millennia, or as if
    </p>
    <p>
     they were hallucinations.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I can understand that ! ” cried Lukas eagerly. 
Our conversation was only just beginning to interest 
him. “ How well do I understand ! That is just how
    </p>
    <p>
     44
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     I was affected by my war experiences. I thought I 
had experienced them clearly and vividly, I was 
almost bursting with images of them ; the roll of film 
in my head seemed miles long. But when I sat at my 
writing-desk, on a chair, by a table, the razed villages 
and woods, the earth tremors caused by heavy bom- 
bardment, the conglomeration of filth and greatness, 
of fear and heroism, of mangled stomachs and heads, 
of fear of death and grim humour, were all immeasur- 
ably remote, only a dream, were not related to any- 
thing and could not really be conceived. You know 
that despite this, I finally wrote my war-book and 
that it is now read and discussed a great deal. But 
do you know, I do not think that ten books like it, 
each one ten times better and more vivid than mine, 
could convey any real picture of the war to the most 
serious reader, if he had not himself experienced the 
war. And there were not so many who had. Even 
those who participated in it did not for a long time 
experience it. And if many really did so — they forgot 
about it again. Next to the hunger to experience a 
thing, men have perhaps no stronger hunger than to 
forget.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He was silent and looked perplexed and lost in 
thought. His words had confirmed my own experi- 
ences and thoughts.
    </p>
    <p>
     After a time I asked him warily, “ Then how was 
it possible for you to write the book ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     45
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     He thought for a moment, brought back from his 
reflections. “ It was only possible for me to do it,” 
he said, “ because it was necessary. I either had to 
write the book or be reduced to despair ; it was the 
only means of saving me from nothingness, chaos 
and suicide. The book was written under this 
pressure and brought me the expected cure, simply 
because it was written, irrespective of whether it was 
good or bad. That was the only thing that counted. 
And whilst writing it, there was no need for me to 
think at all of any other reader but myself, or at the 
most, here and there another close war-comrade, and 
I certainly never thought then about the survivors, 
but always about those who fell in the war. Whilst 
writing it, I was as if delirious or crazy, surrounded 
by three or four people with mutilated bodies — that 
is how the book was produced.”
    </p>
    <p>
     And suddenly he said — it was the end of our first 
conversation : “ Forgive me, I cannot say any more 
about it, not a single word more. I cannot, I will not.
    </p>
    <p>
     Good-bye.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He pushed me out.
    </p>
    <p>
     At our second meeting he was again calm and 
collected, had the same ironical smile and yet seemed 
to treat my problem seriously and to understand it 
fully. He made a few suggestions which seemed, 
however, of little use to me. At the end of the second 
and last conversation, he said to me almost casually .
    </p>
    <p>
     46
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Listen, you continually come back to the episode 
with the servant Leo. I do not like it ; it seems to be 
an obstacle in your way. Free yourself, throw Leo 
overboard ; he seems to be becoming a fixed idea.”
    </p>
    <p>
     I wanted to reply that one could not write any 
books without fixed ideas. Instead he startled me 
with the quite unexpected question : “ Was he really 
called Leo ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     There was perspiration on my brow.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes,” I said, “ of course he was called Leo.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Was that his Christian name ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     I stammered.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ No, his Christian name was — was — I don’t know 
it any more. I have forgotten it. Leo was his sur- 
name. That was what everyone called him.”
    </p>
    <p>
     Whilst I was still speaking, Lukas had seized a 
thick book from his writing-desk and was turning 
over the leaves. With amazing speed he found and 
put his finger on a place on an open page in the 
book. It was a directory, and where his finger lay 
stood the name Leo.
    </p>
    <p>
     “Look,” he laughed, “we already have a Leo. 
Andreas Leo, 69a Seilergraben. It is an unusual 
name ; perhaps this man knows something about your 
Leo. Go and see him ; perhaps he can tell you what 
you want to know. I do not know. Forgive me, my 
time is limited. I am very pleased to have seen you.”
    </p>
    <p>
     I reeled with stupefaction and excitement as I
    </p>
    <p>
     47
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     closed his door behind me. He was right. I could 
get nothing more from him.
    </p>
    <p>
     On the very same day I went to Seilergraben, 
looked for the house and enquired about Mr. Andreas 
Leo. He lived in a room on the third floor. He was 
sometimes at home on Sundays and in the evenings ; 
during the day he went to work. I enquired about 
his occupation. He did this, that and the other, they 
said ; he could do manicures, chiropody and massage; 
he also made ointments and herbal cures. In bad 
times, when there was little to do, he sometimes also 
occupied himself by training and trimming dogs. I 
went away and decided it was better not to visit this 
man, or, at any rate, not to tell him of my intentions. 
Nevertheless, I was very curious to see him. I there- 
fore watched the house during the next few days 
during my frequent walks, and I shall also go there 
today, for up till now I have not been successful in
    </p>
    <p>
     meeting Andreas Leo face to face.
    </p>
    <p>
     Oh, the whole business is driving me to despair, 
and yet it makes me happy, or rather excited and 
eager. It gives importance to myself and my life 
again, and that had been very much lacking.
    </p>
    <p>
     It is possible that the practitioners and psycholo- 
gists who attribute all human action to egoistic 
desires are right ; I cannot indeed see that a man 
who serves a cause all his life, who neglects his 
pleasures and well-being, and sacrifices himself for
    </p>
    <p>
     48
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     anything at all, really acts in the same way as a man 
who traffics in slaves or deals in munitions and 
squanders the proceeds on a life of pleasure. But no 
doubt I should immediately get the worst of it and 
be beaten in an argument with such a psychologist, 
for psychologists are, of course, people who always 
win. As far as I am concerned, they may be right. 
Then everything else that I have considered good and 
fine, and for which I have made sacrifices, has only 
been my egoistic desires. Indeed, every day I see my 
egoism more clearly in my plan to write some kind 
of history of the Journey to the East. At the begin- 
ning, it seemed to me that I was undertaking a 
laborious task in the name of a noble cause, but I 
see more and more that in the description of my 
journey I am only aiming at the same thing as Mr. 
Lukas with his war-book ; namely, at saving my life 
by giving it meaning again.
    </p>
    <p>
     If I could only see the way ! If I could only make 
one step forward.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Throw Leo overboard, free yourself from Leo ! ” 
Lukas said to me. I could just as much throw my 
head or my stomach overboard to get rid of them 1
    </p>
    <p>
     Dear God, help me a little.
    </p>
    <p>
     49
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter four
    </head>
    <p>
     Now everything seems different again, and I do not 
yet know whether it has helped me in my problem 
or not. But I have had an experience, something has 
happened to me which I never expected — or no, did 
I not really expect it, did I not anticipate, hope for 
and really fear it ? Yes, I did. Yet it remains strange 
and improbable enough.
    </p>
    <p>
     I went to Seilergraben frequently, twenty times or 
more, at what I thought were favourable times, and 
often wandered past No. 69a, always with the 
thought, “ I shall try once more, and if there is 
nothing in it I shall not come again.” Yet I went 
again and again, and the day before yesterday my 
wish was fulfilled. Oh, and what a fulfilment it was !
    </p>
    <p>
     As I approached the house of which I now knew 
every crack and fissure in its grey-green plaster, I 
heard the tune whistled of a little song or dance, a 
popular tune, coming from the upper window. I did 
not know anything yet, but I listened. The tune 
stirred my memory and some dormant recollections 
came to the fore. The music was banal but the 
whistling was wonderfully sweet, with soft and
    </p>
    <p>
     50
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     pleasing notes, unusually pure, as happy and as 
natural as the songs of birds. I stood and listened, 
enchanted, and at the same time strangely moved 
without, however, having any kind of accompanying 
thoughts. Or if I did, it was perhaps that it must be 
a very happy and amiable man who could whistle 
like that. For several minutes I stood there rooted to 
the spot and listened. An old man with a sick, 
sunken face went by. He saw me standing and 
listened too, just for a moment, then smiled at me 
with understanding as he went on. His beautiful, far- 
seeing old man’s look seemed to say : “You stay 
there, one does not hear whistling like that every 
day.” The old man’s glance cheered me. I was sorry 
when he went past. At the same moment, however, 
I immediately realised that this whistling was the 
fulfilment of all my wishes, that the whistler must be 
Leo.
    </p>
    <p>
     It was growing dark but there was still no light in 
any window. The tune, with its simple variations, 
was finished. There was silence. “ He will now make 
a light up there,” I thought, but everything remained 
in darkness. Then I heard a door being opened 
upstairs and soon I also heard footsteps on the stairs. 
The door of the house was opened and someone came 
out, and his walk was like his whistling, light and 
jolly, but steady, healthy and youthful. It was a very 
slim, hatless man, not very tall, who walked there.
    </p>
    <p>
     51
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     and now my feeling was changed to certainty. It was 
Leo ; not only the Leo from the directory, it was Leo 
himself, our dear travelling companion and servant 
Leo, whose disappearance ten or more years ago had 
brought us so much sadness and confusion. I nearly 
addressed him in the moment of my initial joy and 
surprise. Then I only just remembered that I had 
also often heard him whistling during the journey to 
the East. They were the same strains of previous 
times, and yet how strangely different they sounded 
to me ! A feeling of sadness came over me like a 
stab in the heart : oh, how different everything had 
become since then, the sky, the air, the seasons, 
dreams, sleep, day and night! How greatly and 
terribly everything had changed for me when, through 
memory of the past alone, a whistle and the rhythm 
of a known step could affect me so deeply and give
    </p>
    <p>
     me so much pleasure and pain !
    </p>
    <p>
     The man went close by me, his bare head, supple
    </p>
    <p>
     and serene on his bare neck, appeared above his blue 
open-neck shirt. The figure moved easily and gaily 
along the darkening lane, hardly audible in thin 
sandals or gym shoes. I followed him without any 
particular intention. How could I help but follow 
him ! He walked down the lane, and although his 
step was light, effortless and youthful, it was also in 
keeping with the evening ; it was of the same quail y 
as the twilight, it was friendly and at one with t e
    </p>
    <p>
     52
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     hour, with the subdued sounds from the centre of 
the town, with the half-light of the first lamps which 
were just beginning to appear.
    </p>
    <p>
     He turned into the small park at St. Paul’s Gate, 
disappeared amongst the tall round bushes, and I 
hurried so that I should not lose him. There he was 
again ; he was sauntering slowly alongside the lilac 
bushes and the acacia. The path divided into two 
through the little wood. There were a couple of 
benches at the edge of the sward. Here under the 
trees it was already dark. Leo went past the first 
bench ; a pair of lovers were sitting on it. The next 
bench was empty. He sat down, leaned against the 
bench, pressed his head back and for a time looked 
up at the foliage and the clouds. Then he took a 
small round white metal box out of his coat pocket, 
put it by his side on the bench, unscrewed the lid 
and slowly began to take something out of the box 
which he put into his mouth and ate with enjoyment. 
Meantime I walked to and from the entrance to the 
wood ; I then went up to his bench and sat down at 
the other end. He looked up, gazed at me with clear
    </p>
    <p>
     grey eyes and went on eating. He was eating dried 
fruits, a few prunes and half apricots. He took them 
one after the other between two fingers, pressed and 
fingered each one a little, put them in his mouth and 
chewed them for a long time with enjoyment. It took 
a long time before he came to the last one and ate it.
    </p>
    <p>
     53
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     He then closed the box again and put it away, leaned 
back and stretched out his legs. I now saw that his 
cloth shoes had soles of plaited rope.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ It will rain tonight,” he said suddenly, I knew not 
whether to me or to himself.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes, it looks like it,” I said, somewhat embar- 
rassed, for as he had not yet recognised my figure 
and walk, it was possible and I was almost certain 
that he would now recognise me by my voice.
    </p>
    <p>
     But no, he did not recognise me at all, not even by 
my voice, and although that had been my first wish, 
it nevertheless gave me a feeling of great disappoint- 
ment. He did not recognise me. While he had 
remained the same after ten years and had apparently 
not aged at all, it was quite different with me, sadly
    </p>
    <p>
     different.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ You whistle very well,” I said. “ I heard you 
earlier on in Seilergraben. It gave me very much
    </p>
    <p>
     pleasure. I used to be a musician.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, were you ! ” he said in a friendly manner.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ That is a great profession. Have you given it up,
    </p>
    <p>
     then ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes, for the time being. I have even sold my 
violin.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “Have you? What a pity ! Are you m difficulties
    </p>
    <p>
     — that is to say, are you hungry ? There is still some 
food at my house. I also have a little money in my
    </p>
    <p>
     purse.”
    </p>
    <p>
     54
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, no,” I said quickly, “ I did not mean that. 
I am in quite good circumstances. I have more than 
I need. But thank you very much ; it was very kind 
of you to make the offer. One does not often meet 
such kind people.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Don’t you think so ? Well, maybe ! People are 
often very strange. You are a strange person, too.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “Am I ? Why ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “Well, because you have enough money and yet 
you sell your violin. Do you not, then, like music 
any more ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, yes, but it sometimes happens that a man no 
longer finds pleasure in something that he previously 
loved. It sometimes happens that a man sells his 
violin or throws it to the wall, or that a painter one 
day burns all his pictures. Have you never heard of 
such a thing ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, yes. That comes from despair. That does 
happen. I even knew two people who committed 
suicide. People like that are stupid and can be 
dangerous. One just cannot help some people. But
    </p>
    <p>
     what do you do now that you no longer have your 
violin ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, this, that and the other. I do not really do 
much. I am no longer young and I am also often 
ill. But why do you keep on talking about this 
violin ? It is not really so important.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ The violin ? It made me think of King David.”
    </p>
    <p>
     55
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ King David ? What has he to do with it ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ He was also a musician. When he was quite 
young he used to play to King Saul and sometimes 
dispelled his bad moods with music. Later he became 
a king himself, a great king full of cares, having all 
sorts of moods and vexations. He wore a crown and 
conducted wars and all that kind of thing, and he 
also did many really wicked things and became very 
famous. But when I think of his life, the most 
beautiful part of it all is about the young David with 
his harp playing music to poor Saul, and it seems a 
pity to me that he later became a king. He was a 
much happier and better person when he was a 
musician.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Of course he was ! ” I cried rather passionately.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Of course, he was younger then and more hand- 
some and happier. But one does not always remain 
young ; your David would in time have grown older 
and uglier and would have been full of cares even if 
he had remained a musician. So he became the great 
David, performed his deeds and composed his psalms.
    </p>
    <p>
     Life is not just a game ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     Leo then rose and bowed. “ It is growing dark, 
he said, “ and it will rain soon. I do not know a 
great deal more about the deeds that David per- 
formed, and whether they were really great. To be 
quite frank, I do not know very much more about
    </p>
    <p>
     56
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     his psalms either, but I should not like to say any- 
thing against them. But no account of David can 
prove to me that life is not just a game. That is just 
what life is when it is beautiful and happy — a game ! 
Naturally, one can also do all kinds of other things 
with it, make a duty of it, or a battleground, or a 
prison, but that does not make it any prettier. Good- 
bye, pleased to have met you ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     This strange, lovable man began to move away in 
his light, steady and pleasing gait, and was on the 
point of disappearing when all my restraint and self- 
control broke down. I ran after him in despair and 
cried imploringly, “ Leo ! Leo! You are Leo, aren’t 
you ? Do you not know me any more ? We were 
League brothers together and should still be so. We 
were both travellers on the journey to the East. Have 
you really forgotten me, Leo ? Do you really no 
longer remember the Crown Watchers, Klingsor and 
Goldmund, the Festival in Bremgarten and the gorge 
at Morbio Inferiore ? Leo, have pity on me ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     He did not run away as I had feared but he also 
did not turn round ; he walked steadily on as if he 
had heard nothing but gave me time to catch up to 
him, and did not seem to object to my joining him.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ You are so troubled and hasty,” he said kindly, 
” that is not a good thing. It distorts the face and 
makes one ill. We shall walk quite slowly — it is so 
soothing. The few drops of rain are wonderful.
    </p>
    <p>
     57
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     aren’t they ? They come from the air like Eau de 
Cologne.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Leo,” I pleaded, “ have pity ! Tell me just one 
thing ; do you know me yet ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “Ah,” he said kindly, and went on speaking as if 
to a sick or drunken man, “ you will be better now ; 
it was only excitement. You ask if I know you. Well, 
which person really knows another or even himself ? 
As for me, I am not one who understands people at 
all. I am not interested in them. Now, I understand 
dogs quite well, and also birds and cats — but I don’t 
really know you, sir.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ But do you not belong to the League ? Did you 
not come on the journey with us ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I am still on the journey, sir, and I still belong 
to the League. So many come and go ; one knows 
people and yet does not know them. It is much easier 
with dogs. Wait, stay here a moment ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     He raised a warning finger. We stood on the 
darkening garden-path which was becomingly in- 
creasingly enveloped in a thin descending dampness. 
Leo pursed up his lips and sent out a long, vibrating, 
soft whistle, waited a while and whistled again. I 
drew back a little as, suddenly, close to us, behind 
the trellis-work railing at which we stood, a large 
Alsatian dog jumped out of the bushes and, whining 
with pleasure, pressed close to the fence in order to
    </p>
    <p>
     58
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     be stroked by Leo’s fingers between the bars and 
wires. The powerful animal’s eyes gleamed a light 
green, and whenever his glance alighted on me he 
growled deep down in his throat. It was like distant 
thunder, hardly audible.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ This is the Alsatian dog, Nccker,” said Leo, 
introducing me. “ We are very good friends. Necker, 
here is a former violinist. You must not do anything 
to him, not even bark at him.”
    </p>
    <p>
     We stood there, and Leo gently scratched the dog’s 
damp coat through the railing. It really was a pretty 
scene ; it pleased me very much to see how friendly 
he was with the dog and the pleasure that this noc- 
turnal greeting gave him. At the same time, it was 
painful to me and seemed hardly bearable that Leo 
should be so friendly with this Alsatian, and probably 
with many, perhaps with all the dogs in the district, 
while a world of aloofness separated him from me. 
The friendship and intimacy which I beseechingly 
and humbly sought seemed not only to belong to this 
dog Necker, but to every animal, to every raindrop, 
to every spot of ground on which Leo trod. He 
seemed to dedicate himself steadfastly and to rest 
continually in an easy, balanced relationship with his 
surroundings, knowing all things, known and beloved 
by all. Only with me, who loved and needed him so 
much, was there no contact, only from me did he 
dissociate himself ; he regarded me in an unfriendly
    </p>
    <p>
     59
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     and cool fashion, was distant with me and had erased 
me from his memory.
    </p>
    <p>
     We walked slowly on. On the other side of the 
railing the Alsatian accompanied him, making soft, 
contented sounds of affection and pleasure, but with- 
out forgetting my undesirable presence, for several 
times he suppressed his growling tone of defence and 
hostility for Leo’s sake.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Forgive me,” I began again, “ I am attaching 
myself to you and taking up your time. Naturally, 
you want to go home and go to bed.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Not at all,” he said with a smile. “ I do not mind 
strolling along throughout the night like this. I am 
not lacking in either the time or the desire if it is not 
too much for you.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He said this in a very friendly manner and cer- 
tainly without reservation. But he had hardly 
uttered the words when I suddenly felt in my head 
and in every muscle of my body how terribly tired I 
was, and how fatiguing every step of this futile and 
embarrassing nocturnal wandering was to me.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I am really very tired,” I said dejectedly, “ I , 
have only just realised it. There is also no sense in 
wandering about all night in the rain and being a
    </p>
    <p>
     nuisance to other people.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “As you wish,” he said politely.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Oh, Mr. Leo, you did not talk to me like that
    </p>
    <p>
     during the League’s journey to the East. Have you
    </p>
    <p>
     60
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     really forgotten all about it ? Oh, well, it is no use. 
Do not let me keep you any longer. Good-night.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He disappeared quickly into the dark night. I 
remained alone, foolish, with my head bent. I had 
lost the game. He did not know me ; he did not want 
to know me ; he made fun of me.
    </p>
    <p>
     I went back along the path ; the dog Necker 
barked angrily behind the railing. I shivered from 
weariness, grief and loneliness in the damp warmth 
of the summer night.
    </p>
    <p>
     I had experienced similar hours in the past. During 
such periods of despair it seemed to me as if I, a lost 
pilgrim, had reached the extreme edge of the world, 
and there was nothing left for me to do but to satisfy 
my last desire : to let myself fall from the edge of the 
world into the void — to death. In the course of time 
this despair returned many times ; the compelling 
suicidal impulse, however, had been diverted and had 
almost vanished. Death was no longer nothingness, 
a void, negation. It had also become many other 
things to me. I now accepted the hours of despair 
as one accepts acute physical pain ; one endures it, 
complainingly or defiantly ; one feels it swell and 
increase, and sometimes there is a raging or mocking 
curiosity as to how much further it can go, to what 
extent the pain can still increase.
    </p>
    <p>
     All the disgust for my disillusioned life which, since 
my return from the unsuccessful journey to the East,
    </p>
    <p>
     61
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     had become increasingly worthless and spiritless, all 
disbelief in myself and my abilities, all envious and 
regretful longing for the good and great times which 
I had once experienced, grew like a pain within me, 
grew as high as a tree, like a mountain, tugged at 
me, and was all related to the former task that I had 
begun, to the account of the Journey to the East and 
the League. It now seemed to me that even its 
* accomplishment was no longer desirable or worth- 
while. Only one hope still seemed worth-while to me 
— to cleanse and redeem myself to some extent 
through my work, through my service to the memory 
of that great time, to bring myself once again into 
contact with the League and its experiences.
    </p>
    <p>
     When I reached home I turned on the light, sat 
down at my desk in my wet clothes, my hat on my 
head, and wrote a letter. I wrote ten, twelve, twenty 
pages of grievances, remorse and entreaty to Leo. I 
described my need to him, conjured up images of our 
common experiences, of our former mutual friends.
    </p>
    <p>
     I bewailed the endless extreme difficulties which had 
shattered my noble enterprise. The weariness of the 
moment had disappeared ; excited, I sat there and 
wrote. Despite all difficulties, I wrote, I would endure 
the worst possible thing rather than divulge a single 
secret of the League. Despite everything, I would not 
fail to complete my work in memory of the Journey 
to the East, in glorification of the League. As if in a
    </p>
    <p>
     62
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     fever, I covered page after page with hastily written 
words. The grievances, indictments and self-accusa- 
tions tumbled from me like water from a breaking 
jug, without reflection, without faith, without hope of 
reply, only with the desire to unburden myself. While 
it was yet night I took the thick, confused letter to 
the nearest letter-box. Then, at last, it was nearly 
morning. I turned out the light, went to the small 
attic-bedroom next to my living-room and went to
    </p>
    <p>
     bed. I fell asleep immediately and slept very deeply 
and for a long time.
    </p>
    <p>
     63
    </p>
   </div>
   <div>
    <head>
     Chapter five
    </head>
    <p>
     After awakening and dozing off again several times, 
I awoke the following day with a headache but feeling 
rested. To my extreme astonishment, pleasure and 
also embarrassment, I found Leo in the living-room. 
He was sitting on the edge of a chair and looked as 
if he had been waiting a long time.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Leo,” I cried, “ you have come ! ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “They have sent me for you from the League,” 
he said. “ You wrote me a letter in connection with 
it. I gave it to the officials. You are to appear before 
the High Throne. Can we go ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     In confusion I hastened to put on my shoes. The 
desk, disarranged the previous night, still had a 
somewhat disturbed and disorderly appearance. For 
the moment I hardly knew any more what I had 
written there so forcibly and full of anguish a few 
hours ago. Still, it did not seem to have been in vain. 
Something had happened. Leo had come.
    </p>
    <p>
     Suddenly, for the first time, I realised the sig- 
nificance of his words. So there was still a “ League ” 
of which I no longer knew anything, which existed 
without me and which no longer considered me as
    </p>
    <p>
     64
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     belonging to it ! There was still a League and the 
High Throne ! There were still the officials ; they 
had sent for me ! I went hot and cold at the realisa- 
tion. I had lived in this town many months, occupied 
with my notes about the League and our journey and 
did not know whether the rest of the League still 
existed, where it was, and whether I was perhaps its 
last member. Indeed, to be quite frank, at certain 
times I was not sure whether the League and my 
membership of it were ever real. And now Leo stood 
there, sent by the League to fetch me. I was remem- 
bered, I was summoned, they wanted to listen to me, 
perhaps to pass judgment on me. Good ! I was 
ready. I was ready to show that I had not been 
unfaithful to the League. I was ready to obey. 
Whether the officials punished me or pardoned me, 
I was ready in advance to accept everything, to agree
    </p>
    <p>
     with their judgment in everything and to be obedient 
to them.
    </p>
    <p>
     We set off. Leo went on ahead, and again, as I did 
many years ago when I watched him and the way he 
walked, I had to admire him as a good and perfect 
servant. He walked along the lanes in front of me, 
nimbly and patiently, indicating the way ; he was the 
perfect guide, the perfect servant at his task, the 
perfect official. Yet he put my patience to no small 
test. The League had summoned me, I was awaited 
by the High Throne, everything was at stake for me ;
    </p>
    <p>
     65
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     the whole of my future life would be decided, the 
whole of my past life would now either retain or 
completely lose its meaning — I trembled with expecta- 
tion, pleasure, anxiety and suppressed fear. And so 
the route that Leo took seemed, in my impatience, 
intolerably long, for I had to follow my guide for 
more than two hours by way of the strangest and 
seemingly most capricious detours. Leo kept me 
waiting twice in front of a church in which he went 
to pray. For a long time that seemed endless to me, 
he remained meditating and absorbed in front of the 
old town-hall, and told me about its foundation in 
the fifteenth century by a famous member of the 
League. And although the way he took this walk 
seemed so painstaking, zealous and purposeful, I 
became quite confused by the detours, roundabouts 
and zig-zags by which he approached his goal. The 
walk, which took us all morning, could easily have 
been done in a quarter of an hour.
    </p>
    <p>
     At last he led me into a sleepy, suburban lane, 
and into a very large, silent building. Outside it 
looked like an extended Council building or a 
museum. At first there was not a soul to be seen 
anywhere. Corridors and stairs were deserted and 
resounded at our footsteps. Leo began to search 
among the passages, stairs and antechambers. Once, 
he cautiously opened a big door, on the other side of 
which we saw a crowded artist’s studio ; in front of
    </p>
    <p>
     66
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     an easel stood the artist Klingsor in his shirt-sleeves 
—oh, how many years was it since I had seen his 
beloved face ! But I did not dare to greet him ; the 
time was not yet ripe for that. I was expected. I had 
been summoned. Klingsor did not pay very much 
attention to us. He nodded to Leo ; either he did not 
see me or did not recognise me, and silently indicated 
to us in a friendly but decisive way to go out, not 
tolerating any interruption of his work.
    </p>
    <p>
     Finally, at the top of the immense building, we 
arrived at a garret-storey, which smelled of paper 
and cardboard, and all along the walls for many 
hundreds of yards protruded cupboard-doors, backs 
of books and bundles of documents : a gigantic 
archive, a vast chancery. Nobody took any notice 
of us ; everyone was silently occupied. It seemed to 
me as if the whole world, including the starry 
heavens, was governed or at least recorded and 
observed from there. For a long time we stood there 
and waited ; many archive and library officials 
hastened around us silently with catalogue dockets 
and numbers in their hands. Ladders were placed in 
position and mounted, lifts and small trucks were 
carefully and quietly set into motion. Finally, Leo 
began to sing. I listened to the tune, deeply moved ; 
it had once been very familiar to me. It was the 
melody of one of our League songs.
    </p>
    <p>
     67
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     At the sound of the song, everything immediately 
sprang into movement. The officials drew back, the 
hall extended into dusky remoteness. The industrious 
people, small and unreal, worked in the gigantic 
archive region in the background. The foreground, 
however, was spacious and empty. The hall extended 
to an impressive length. In the middle, arranged in 
strict order, there were many benches, and partly 
from the background and partly out of the numerous 
doors came many officials who slowly approached 
the benches and one by one sat down on them. One 
row of benches after the other was slowly filled. The 
structure of benches gradually rose and culminated 
in a high throne, which was not yet occupied. The 
solemn Synedrium was crowded right up to the 
throne. Leo looked at me with a warning glance to 
be patient, silent and respectful, and disappeared 
amongst the crowd ; all of a sudden he was gone and 
I could no longer see him. But here and there amidst 
the officials who assembled around the High Throne 
I perceived familiar faces, serious or smiling. I saw 
the figure of Albertus Magnus, the ferryman 
Vasudeva, the artist Klingsor, and others.
    </p>
    <p>
     At last it became quiet and the Speaker stepped 
forward. Small and alone I stood before the High 
Throne, prepared for everything, in a state of great 
anxiety, but also in full accord with what would take 
place and be resolved here.
    </p>
    <p>
     68
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNBY TO THE BAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Clearly and evenly the Speaker’s voice rang 
through the hall. “ Self-accusation of a deserter 
League brother,” I heard him announce. My knees 
trembled. It was a question of my life. But it was 
right that it should be so ; everything must now be 
put in order. The Speaker continued.
    </p>
    <p>
     " Is y°ur name H.H. ? Did you join in the march 
through Upper Swabia, and in the festival at Brem- 
garten ? Did you desert your colours shortly after 
Morbio Inferiore ? Did you confess that you wanted 
to write a story of the Journey to the East ? Did you 
consider yourself hampered by your vow of silence 
about the League’s secrets ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     I answered question after question with “Yes,”
    </p>
    <p>
     even those which were incomprehensible and terrify- 
ing to me.
    </p>
    <p>
     The officials conferred in whispers and with 
gestures for a short time ; then the Speaker stepped 
forward again and announced :
    </p>
    <p>
     “ The self-accuser is herewith empowered to reveal 
publicly every law and secret of the League which is 
known to him. Moreover, the whole of the League’s 
archives are placed at his disposal for his work.”
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker drew back. The officials disbanded 
and again slowly disappeared, some into the back- 
ground of the hall and some through the exits ; there 
was complete silence in the large hall. I was looking 
anxiously around me when I saw something lying on
    </p>
    <p>
     69
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     one of the chancery documents which seemed familiar 
to me. When I picked it up, I recognised my work, 
my delicate offspring, the manuscript I had com- 
menced. “ The Story of the Journey to the East,” by 
H.H., was inscribed on the blue envelope. I seized 
it and read the small, close, hand-written, oft-times 
crossed out and corrected pages. In haste, eager to 
work, I was overwhelmed with the feeling that now 
at last, with approval from higher quarters, indeed 
assistance, I was to be allowed to complete my task. 
When I considered that no vow any longer bound 
me, that I had access to the archives, to those 
immense treasure-chambers, my task seemed to me 
greater and more worth-while than ever.
    </p>
    <p>
     However, the more pages I read of my hand- 
writing, the less did I like the manuscript. Even in 
my former most despondent hours it had never 
seemed so futile and absurd to me as now. Every- 
thing seemed so confused and stupid ; the clearest 
relationships were distorted, the most obvious were 
forgotten, the trivial and the unimportant pushed 
into the foreground. It must be written again, right 
from the beginning. As I continued reading the 
manuscript, I had to cross out sentence after sentence, 
and as I crossed them out, they crumbled up on the 
paper, and the clear, sloping letters separated into 
assorted fragments, into strokes and points, into 
circles, small flowers and stars, and the pages were
    </p>
    <p>
     70
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     covered like carpets with graceful, meaningless, orna- 
mental designs. Soon there was nothing more left of 
my text ; on the other hand, there was much unused 
paper left for my work. I pulled myself together. I 
tried to see things clearly. Naturally, it was not 
previously possible for me to present an impartial and 
clear account, because everything was concerned with 
secrets which I was forbidden to disclose on account 
of my vow to the League. I had tried to avoid an 
objective presentation of the story, and without 
regard to the more important relationships, aims and 
purposes, I had simply restricted myself to my 
personal experiences. But one could see where that 
had led. On the other hand, there was no longer a 
pledge of silence and no more restrictions. I was 
given complete official permission, and, moreover,
    </p>
    <p>
     the whole of the inexhaustible archives lay open 
to me.
    </p>
    <p>
     It was clear to me that even if my former work 
had not broken up into ornamentation, I had to begin 
the whole thing afresh, with a new foundation, and 
build it up again. I decided to begin with a short 
account of the League, its foundation and constitu- 
tion. The extensive, endless, gigantic labelled cata- 
logues on all the tables, which reached far into the 
distance and semi-darkness, must surely give an 
answer to all my questions.
    </p>
    <p>
     71
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     First of all I decided to examine the archives at 
random. I had to learn how to use this tremendous 
machine. Naturally, I looked for the League docu- 
ment before anything else.
    </p>
    <p>
     ‘‘League document,” it stated in the catalogue, 
“ see section Chrysostomos, group V, verse 39, 8.” — 
Right, I found the section, the group and the verse 
quite easily. The archives were wonderfully arranged. 
And now I held the League document in my hand. 
I had to be prepared for the possibility that I might 
not be able to read it. As a matter of fact, I could 
not read it. It was written in Greek characters, it 
seemed to me, and I understood a certain amount of 
Greek, but for one thing it was in extremely ancient, 
strange writing, the characters of which, despite 
apparent clarity, were for the most part illegible to 
me, and, for another thing, the text was written in 
dialect or in a secret symbolical language, of which 
I only occasionally understood a word as if from a 
distance, by sound and analogy. But I was not yet 
discouraged. Even if the document remained un- 
readable, its characters brought back to me vivid 
memories of the past. In particular, I clearly saw my 
friend Longus writing Greek and Hebrew characters 
in the garden in the evening, the characters changing
    </p>
    <p>
     into birds, dragons and snakes in the night.
    </p>
    <p>
     Looking through the catalogue, I trembled at the 
abundance of material that awaited me there. I came
    </p>
    <p>
     72
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     across many familiar words and many well-known 
names. With a start, I came across my own name, 
but I did not dare to consult the archives about it — 
who could bear to hear the verdict of an omniscient 
Court of Law on oneself ? On the other hand, I 
found, for example, the name of the artist Paul Klee, 
whose acquaintance I had made during the journey 
and who was a friend of Klingsor’s. I looked up his 
number in the archives. I found there a small gold- 
plated dish on which a clover was either painted or 
engraved. The first of its three leaves represented a 
small blue sailing-boat, the second a fish with 
coloured scales and the third looked like a telegram- 
form on which was written :
    </p>
    <p>
     As blue as snow.
    </p>
    <p>
     Is Paul like Klee.*
    </p>
    <p>
     It also gave me a melancholy pleasure to read 
about Klingsor, Longus, Max and Tilli. Also I could 
not resist the desire to learn something more about 
Leo. On Leo’s catalogue label was written :
    </p>
    <p>
     Cave !
    </p>
    <p>
     Archiepisc. XIX . Diacon. D. VII.
    </p>
    <p>
     Como Ammon. 6 
Cave !
    </p>
    <p>
     Note : *Klee= clover.
    </p>
    <p>
     73
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     The two “ Cave ” warnings impressed me. I could 
not bring myself to penetrate this secret. However, 
with every new attempt, I began to realise more and 
more what an undreamt-of abundance of material, 
knowledge and magic formula these archives con- 
tained. It included, it seemed to me, the whole world.
    </p>
    <p>
     After happy or bewildering excursions into many 
branches of knowledge, I returned several times to 
the label “ Leo ” with ever-increasing curiosity. Each 
time the double “ Cave ” deterred me. Then, while 
going through another filing cabinet, I came across 
the word “ Fatima,” with the notes :
    </p>
    <p>
     princ. orient. 2
    </p>
    <p>
     noct. mill. 983
    </p>
    <p>
     hort. delic. 07
    </p>
    <p>
     I looked for and found the place in the archives. 
There lay a tiny locket which could be opened and 
contained a miniature portrait of a ravishingly 
beautiful princess, which in an instant reminded me 
of all the thousand and one nights, of all the tales 
of my youth, of all the dreams and wishes of that 
great period when, in order to travel to Fatima in 
the Orient, I had served my novitiate and had 
reported myself as a member of the League. The 
locket was wrapped in a finely-spun mauve s' 
kerchief, which had an immeasurably remote and 
sweet fragrance, reminiscent of princesses and the
    </p>
    <p>
     74
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     East. As I inhaled this remote, rare, magic fragrance, 
I was suddenly and powerfully overwhelmed with the 
realisation of the sweet magic which had enveloped 
me when I commenced my pilgrimage to the East, 
and how the pilgrimage was shattered by treacherous 
and, in fact, unknown obstacles, how the magic had 
then vanished more and more, and what desolation, 
disillusionment and barren despair had since been my 
life’s breath, my food and drink ! I could no longer 
see the kerchief or the portrait, so thick was the veil 
of tears which covered my eyes. Ah, now, I thought, 
the portrait of the Arabian princess could no longer 
suffice to act as a charm against the world and hell, 
and make me into a knight and crusader ; I would 
now need other stronger charms. But how sweet, how 
innocent, how blissful had been that dream which 
had haunted my youth, which had made me a story- 
teller, a musician and a novitiate, and had led me to 
Morbio !
    </p>
    <p>
     Sounds awakened me from my meditation. From 
all sides the unending spaciousness of the archive 
chamber confronted me eerily. A new thought, a new 
pain shot threw me like a flash of lightning. I, in my 
simplicity, wanted to write the story of the League, 
I, who could not decipher or understand one- 
thousandth part of those millions of scripts, books* 
pictures and references in the archives ! Humbled, 
unspeakably foolish, unspeakably ridiculous, not
    </p>
    <p>
     75
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     understanding myself, feeling extremely small, I saw 
myself standing in the midst of this thing with which 
I had been allowed to play a little in order to make 
me realise what the League was and what I was 
myself.
    </p>
    <p>
     The officials came through the numerous doors in 
enormous numbers. I could still recognise many of 
them through my tears. I recognised Jup, the 
magician, I recognised Lindhorst, the archivist, I 
recognised Mozart dressed as Pablo. The illustrious 
assembly filled the many rows of seats, which became 
higher and narrower at the back ; over the throne 
which formed the top, I saw a shining golden canopy.
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker stepped forward and announced : 
“ The League is ready to pass judgment, through its 
officials, on the self-accuser H., who felt bound to 
keep silent about League secrets, and who has now 
realised how strange and blasphemous was his inten- 
tion to write the story of a journey to which he was 
not equal, and an account of a League in whose 
existence he no longer believed and to which he had 
become unfaithful.
    </p>
    <p>
     He turned towards me and said in his clear, pro- 
clamatory voice : “ Self-accuser H., do you agree to 
recognise the Court of Justice and to submit to its
    </p>
    <p>
     judgment ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes,” I replied.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Self-accuser H.,” he continued, 44 do you agree
    </p>
    <p>
     76
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     that the Court of Justice of the officials pass judg- 
ment on you without the President in the Chair, or 
do you desire the President himself to pass judgment 
on you.^X
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I agree,” I said, “ to be judged by the officials, 
either with or without the President in the Chair.”
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker was about to reply when, from the 
very back of the hall, a soft voice said : “ The 
President is ready to pass judgment himself.”
    </p>
    <p>
     The sound of this soft voice shook me strangely. 
Right from the depths of the room, from the remote 
horizons of the archives, came a man. His walk was 
light and peaceful, his robe sparkled with gold. He 
came nearer amid the silence of the assembly, and I 
recognised his walk, I recognised his movements, and 
finally I recognised his face. It was Leo. In a mag- 
nificent, festive robe, he climbed through the rows of 
officials to the High Throne like a Pope. Like a 
magnificent, rare flower, he carried the brilliance of 
his attire up the stairs. Each row of officials rose to 
greet him as he passed. He bore his radiant office 
conscientiously, humbly, dutifully, as humbly as a 
holy Pope or patriarch bears his insignia.
    </p>
    <p>
     I was deeply intrigued and moved in anticipation 
of the judgment which I was humbly prepared to 
accept, whether it would now bring punishment or 
grace. I was no less deeply moved and amazed that 
it was Leo, the former porter and servant, who now
    </p>
    <p>
     77
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     stood at the head of the whole League and was ready 
to pass judgment on me. But I was still more stirred, 
amazed, startled and happy at the great discovery 
of the day : that the League was as completely stable 
and mighty as ever, that it was not Leo and the 
League who had deserted and disillusioned me, but 
only that I had been so weak and foolish as to mis- 
interpret my own experiences, to doubt the League, 
to consider the Journey to the East a failure, and to 
regard myself as the survivor and chronicler of a 
concluded and forgotten tale, while I was nothing 
more than a run-away, a traitor, a deserter. Amaze- 
ment and joy lay in this recognition. I stood there, 
small and humble, at the foot of the High Throne, 
from which I had once been accepted as a brother 
of the League, from which I had once undergone my 
novitiate ceremony, had received the League ring 
and had immediately been sent to the servant Leo 
on the journey. And in the middle of everything, I 
was aware of a new sin, a new inexplicable loss, a 
new shame : I no longer possessed the League ring.
    </p>
    <p>
     I had lost it, I did not know when or where, and I 
had not missed it once until this day !
    </p>
    <p>
     Meantime, the President, the goJden-clad Leo, 
began to speak in his beautiful, gentle voice ; his 
words reached me gently and comfortingly, as gentle 
and comforting as sunshine.
    </p>
    <p>
     78
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ The self-accuser,” came the words from the High 
Throne, “ has had the opportunity to rid himself of 
some of his errors. There is much to be said against 
him. It may be conceivable and very excusable that 
he was unfaithful to the League, that he reproached 
the League with his own failings and follies, that he 
doubted its continuation, that he had the strange 
ambition to become the historian of the League. All 
this does not weigh heavily against him. They are, 
if the self-accuser will permit me the phrase, only 
novitiate stupidities. They can be dismissed with a 
smile.”
    </p>
    <p>
     I breathed deeply and a faint smile passed over 
the whole of the illustrious assembly. That the most 
serious of my sins, even my illusion that the League 
no longer existed and that I was the only disciple 
left, were only regarded by the President as “ stupidi- 
ties,” as trifles, was a tremendous relief to me and 
at the same time sent me most definitely back to my 
starting-point.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ But,” continued Leo, and his gentle voice was 
now sad and serious — “ there are many more serious 
offences imputed to the defendant and the worst of 
them is that he does not stand as self-accuser for 
these sins, but appears to be unaware of them. He 
deeply regrets having wronged the League in thought; 
he cannot forgive himself for not recognising the 
President Leo in the servant Leo, and is on the point
    </p>
    <p>
     79
    </p>
    <p>
     4
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     of realising the extent of his infidelity to the League. 
But while he took these sinful thoughts and follies 
all too seriously, and only just realises with relief that 
they can be dismissed with a smile, he stubbornly 
forgets his real offences, which are legion, each one 
of which is serious enough to warrant severe punish- 
ment.”
    </p>
    <p>
     My heart beat quickly. Leo turned towards me. 
“ Defendant H., later you will have insight to your 
errors and you will also be shown how to avoid them 
in future. But just to show you what little under- 
standing you still have of your position, I ask you : 
Do you remember your walk through the town 
accompanied by the servant Leo, who, as messenger, 
had to bring you before the High Throne ? Yes, you 
remember. And do you remember how we passed 
the Town Hall, the Church of St. Paul and the 
Cathedral, and how the servant Leo entered the 
Cathedral in order to kneel and pray awhile, and how 
you not only refrained from entering with me to 
perform your devotions in accordance with the fourth 
precept of your League vow, but how you remained 
outside, impatient and bored, waiting for the end of 
the tedious ceremony which seemed so unnecessary 
to you, which was nothing more to you than a dis- 
agreeable test of your egoistic impatience ? Yes, you 
remember. By your behaviour at the Cathedral gate 
alone, you have already trampled on the fundamental
    </p>
    <p>
     80
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     requirements and customs of the League. You have 
slighted religion, you have been contemptuous 
towards a League brother, you have impatiently 
rejected an opportunity and invitation to prayer and 
meditation. These sins would be unforgivable were 
there not special extenuating circumstances in your 
case.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He had now struck home. Everything would now 
be said ; there would be no more secondary issues, 
no more mere stupidities. He was more than right 
He had struck at my heart.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ We do not want to count up all the defendant’s 
errors,” continued the President, “ he is not going to 
be judged according to the letter, and we know that 
it only needed our reminder to awaken the defendant’s 
conscience and make him a repentant self-accuser.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ J ust the same, self-accuser H., I would advise you 
to bring some of your other acts before the judgment 
of your conscience. Must I remind you of the 
evening when you visited the servant Leo and wished 
to be recognised by him as a League brother, 
although this was impossible, for you had made 
yourself unrecognisable as a League brother ? Must 
I remind you of things which you yourself said to 
the servant Leo ? About the sale of your violin ? 
About the dreadful, stupid, narrow, suicidal life 
which you have led for years ?
    </p>
    <p>
     81
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ There is still one more thing. League brother H., 
about which I should not keep silent. It is quite 
possible that the servant Leo did you an injustice 
that evening. Let us suppose that he did. The servant 
Leo was perhaps too strict, perhaps too rational ; 
perhaps he did not show enough forbearance and 
sympathy towards you and your circumstances. But 
there are higher authorities and more infallible judges 
than the servant Leo. What was the animal’s judg- 
ment on you, defendant ? Do you remember the dog 
Necker ? Do you remember his rejection and con- 
demnation of you ? He is incorruptible, he does not
    </p>
    <p>
     take sides, he is not a League brother.”
    </p>
    <p>
     He paused. Yes, the Alsatian Necker ! He had 
certainly rejected me and condemned me. I agreed. 
Judgment was already passed on me by the Alsatian,
    </p>
    <p>
     already by myself.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Self-accuser H.,” began Leo again, and from the 
golden gleam of his robes and canopy his voice now 
rang out cool and bright and clear, like the voice of 
the commandant when he appears before Don 
Giovanni’s door in the last Act. “ Self-accuser H., 
you have listened to me. You have agreed with me. 
You have, we presume, already passed judgment on
    </p>
    <p>
     yourself ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes,” I said in a soft voice, “ yes.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “It is, we presume, an unfavourable judgment
    </p>
    <p>
     which you have passed on yourself ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     82
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Yes,” I whispered.
    </p>
    <p>
     Leo then rose from the throne and gently stretched 
out his arms.
    </p>
    <p>
     “ I now turn to you, my officials. You have heard 
and know how things have been with League brother 
H. It is a lot that is not unfamiliar to you ; many of 
you have had to experience it yourselves. The 
defendant did not know until this hour, or could not 
really believe, that his apostasy and aberration were 
a test. For a long time he did not give in. He endured 
it for many years, knowing nothing about the League, 
remaining alone, and seeing everything in which he 
believed in ruins. Finally, he could no longer hide 
and contain himself. His suffering became too great, 
and you know that as soon as suffering becomes acute 
enough, one goes forward. Brother H. was led to 
despair in his test, and despair is the result of each 
earnest attempt to understand and vindicate human 
life. Despair is the result of each earnest attempt to 
go through life with virtue, justice and understanding 
and to fulfil their requirements. Children live on one 
side of despair, the awakened on the other side. 
Defendant H. is no longer a child and is not yet fully 
awakened. He is still in the midst of despair. He 
will overcome it and thereby go through his second 
novitiate. We welcome him anew into the League, 
the meaning of which he no longer claims to under-
    </p>
    <p>
     83
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     stand. We give back to him his lost ring, which the 
servant Leo has kept for him.”
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker then brought the ring, kissed me on 
the cheek and placed the ring on my finger. Hardly 
had I looked at the ring, hardly had I felt its metallic 
coolness on my fingers, when a thousand things 
occurred to me, a thousand inconceivable acts of 
neglect. Above all, it occurred to me that the ring 
had four stones at equal distances apart, and that it 
was a rule of the League and part of the vow to turn 
the ring slowly on the finger at least once a day, and 
at each of the four stones to bring to mind one of the 
four basic precepts of the vow. I had not only lost 
the ring and had not once missed it, but during all 
those dreadful years I had also no longer repeated 
the four basic precepts or thought of them. Immedi- 
ately, I tried to say them again inwardly. I had an 
idea what they were, they were still within me, they 
belonged to me as does a name which one will 
remember in a moment but at that particular moment 
cannot be recalled. No, it remained silent within me,
    </p>
    <p>
     I could not repeat the rules, I had forgotten the word- 
ing. I had forgotten the rules ; for many years I ha 
not repeated them, for many years I had not observed 
them and held them sacred — and yet I had consider
    </p>
    <p>
     myself a loyal League brother.
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker patted my arm kindly when ho
    </p>
    <p>
     84
    </p>
    <p>
     THB JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     observed my dismay and deep shame. Then I heard 
the President speak again :
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Defendant and self-accuser H., you are acquitted, 
but I have to tell you that it is the duty of a brother 
who is acquitted in such a case to enter the ranks of 
the officials and occupy one of their seats as soon as 
he has passed a test of his faith and obedience. He 
has the option of choosing the test. Now, brother H., 
answer my questions !
    </p>
    <p>
     “Are you prepared to tame a wild dog as a test 
of your faith ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     I drew back in horror.
    </p>
    <p>
     No, I could not do it,” I cried, moving away.
    </p>
    <p>
     “Are you prepared and willing to burn the
    </p>
    <p>
     League’s archives immediately at our command, as
    </p>
    <p>
     our Speaker burns a portion of them now before your 
eyes ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker stepped forward, plunged his hands 
into the well-arranged filing-cabinets, drew out both 
hands full of papers, many hundreds of papers, and 
to my horror burnt them over a coal-pan.
    </p>
    <p>
     No,” I said, drawing back, “ I could not do that 
cither.”
    </p>
    <p>
     “ Cave, frater,” cried the President. “ Take heed, 
impetuous brother ! I have begun with the easiest 
tasks which require the smallest amount of faith. 
Each succeeding task will be increasingly difficult.
    </p>
    <p>
     85
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Answer me : are you prepared and willing to consult
    </p>
    <p>
     our archives about yourself ? ”
    </p>
    <p>
     I went cold and held my breath, but I had under- 
stood. Each question would become more and more 
difficult ; there was no escape except into what was 
still worse. Breathing deeply, I stood up and said yes.
    </p>
    <p>
     The Speaker led me to the tables where the 
hundreds of filing-cabinets stood. I looked for and 
found the letter H. I found my name and, indeed, 
first of all that of my ancestor Eoban, who, four 
hundred years ago, had also been a member of the 
League. Then there was my own name, with the
    </p>
    <p>
     comment :
    </p>
    <p>
     Chattorum r. gest. XC. 
civ. Calv. infid. 49.
    </p>
    <p>
     The sheet shook in my hand. Meanwhile, the 
officials rose from their seats one after the other, held 
out their hands to me, looked me straight in the face, 
then went away. The High Throne was vacated and 
last of all, the President descended the throne, held 
out his hand to me, looked me in the face, smiled 
his pious, kind bishop’s smile and left the hall I last 
of all. I remained there alone, the note in my hand
    </p>
    <p>
     to refer to the archives for information.
    </p>
    <p>
     I could not immediately bring myself to take the
    </p>
    <p>
     step of consulting the archives about myself. I stood 
hesitating in the empty hall and saw extend. ng for a 
long way the boxes, cupboards, pigeon-holes
    </p>
    <p>
     86
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     cabinets, the accumulation of all the worth-while 
knowledge to which I could ever gain access. Yet as 
much from fear of seeing my own record sheet as 
from a burning desire for knowledge, I allowed my 
own affairs to wait a little in order to learn first about 
one thing and another which was important to me 
and my story of the journey to the East. To be sure, 
I had long really known that my story had already 
been condemned and disposed of and that I should 
never finish writing it. Just the same, I was curious.
    </p>
    <p>
     I noticed a badly-filed memorandum projecting 
from amongst the others in one of the filing-cabinets. 
I went towards it and drew out the memorandum on 
which was written :
    </p>
    <p>
     Morbio Inferiore.
    </p>
    <p>
     No other catch-word could have expressed the 
extent of my curiosity more briefly and accurately. 
With my heart beating quickly, I looked up the place 
in the archives. It was a section of the archives which 
contained a rather large number of papers. On the 
top lay a copy of a description of the Morbio Gorge 
taken from an old Italian book, then there was a 
quarto sheet with short notes on the part which 
Morbio had played in the history of the League. All 
the notes referred to the Journey to the East and 
indeed to the base and group to which I had belonged. 
Our group, it was recorded here, had arrived at
    </p>
    <p>
     87
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Morbio on its journey. There it was submitted to a 
test which it did not pass, namely, the disappearance 
of Leo. Although the League’s rules should have 
guided us, and although even in the event of a League 
group remaining without a leader, the precepts held 
good and had been inculcated in us at the beginning 
of the journey, yet from the moment our whole group 
discovered the disappearance of Leo it had lost its 
head and faith, had entertained doubts and entered 
into futile arguments. In the end, the whole group, 
contrary to the spirit of the League, had broken up 
into factions and disbanded. This explanation of the 
disaster of Morbio could no longer surprise me much. 
On the other hand, I was extremely surprised at what 
I read further on about the breaking-up of our group, 
namely, that no less than three of our League 
brothers had made an attempt to write an account 
of our journey and had given a description of the 
events at Morbio. I was one of these three and a fair 
copy of my manuscript was included in the section.
    </p>
    <p>
     I read through the two others with the strangest 
feelings. Basically, both writers described the events 
of that day not very differently from the way I ha 
done, and yet how different they seemed to me ! I
    </p>
    <p>
     read in one of them :
    </p>
    <p>
     “It was the absence of the servant Leo wbicn 
revealed to us, suddenly and terribly, the extent of 
the dissention and the perplexities which shattered
    </p>
    <p>
     88
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     our hitherto apparent complete unity. A few of us, 
to be sure, immediately knew or suspected that Leo 
had neither come to any harm nor run away, but that 
he had secretly been recalled by the League officials. 
Yet not one of us can contemplate without feelings 
of deepest repentance and shame how badly we 
underwent this test. Hardly had Leo left us, when 
faith and Concord amongst us was at an end ; it was 
as if the life-blood of our group flowed away from 
an invisible wound. First there were differences of 
opinion, then open quarrels about the most futile and 
ridiculous questions. For example, I remember that 
our very popular and praiseworthy choir-master H.H. 
suddenly maintained that the missing Leo had also 
taken in his bag, along with other valuable objects, 
the ancient sacred document, the original manuscript 
of the Master. This statement was heatedly disputed 
for days. Treated symbolically, H.’s absurd assertion 
was really remarkably significant ; indeed, it did seem 
as if the prosperity of the League, the cohesion of the 
whole, was completely gone with Leo’s departure 
from our little group. The very same musician H. 
was a sad example of this. Until the day of Morbio 
Inferiore he was one of the most loyal and faithful 
League brothers, as well as popular as an artist, and, 
despite many weaknesses of character, he was one of 
our most active members. But he relapsed into 
brooding, depression and mistrust, became more than
    </p>
    <p>
     89
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     negligent in his duties, and began to be intolerant, 
nervous and quarrelsome. As he finally remained 
behind on the march one day and did not appear 
again, it did not occur to anyone to stop on his behalf 
and look for him ; it was evidently a case of desertion. 
Unfortunately, he was not the only one, and finally 
nothing was left of our little travelling group. . .
    </p>
    <p>
     I found this passage in the other historian’s work :
    </p>
    <p>
     “Just as ancient Rome collapsed after Caesar’s 
death, or democratic thought throughout the world 
on Wilson’s desertion of the colours, so did our 
League break up on the unhappy day of Morbio. As 
far as blame and responsibility can be mentioned, 
two apparently harmless members were to blame for 
the collapse, the musician H.H. and Leo, one of the 
servants. These two men were previously popular 
and faithful members of the League, although lacking 
in understanding of its significance in world history. 
They disappeared one day without leaving any trace, 
taking with them many valuable possessions and 
important documents, which indicates that both 
wretches were bribed by enemies of the League. . . .
    </p>
    <p>
     If the memory of this historian was so very con- 
fused and inaccurate, although he apparently made 
the report in all good faith and with the conviction 
of its complete veracity — what was the value of my 
own notes ? If ten other accounts by other authors 
were found about Morbio, Leo and myself, they
    </p>
    <p>
     90
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     would presumably all contradict and censure each 
other. No, our historical efforts were of no use ; 
there was no point in continuing with them and 
reading them ; one could quietly let them be covered 
with dust in this section of the archives.
    </p>
    <p>
     A shudder went through me at the thought of what 
I should still learn in this hour. How awry, altered 
and distorted everything and everyone was in these 
mirrors, how mockingly and unattainably did the 
face of truth hide itself behind all these reports, 
counter-reports and legends ! What was still truth ? 
What was still credible ? And what would remain 
when I also learned about myself, about my own 
character and history from the knowledge stored in 
these archives ?
    </p>
    <p>
     I must be prepared for anything. Suddenly I 
could bear the uncertainty and suspense no longer. 
I hastened to the section Chattorum res gestae, looked 
for my sub-division and number and stood in front 
of the part marked with my name. This was a niche, 
and when I drew the thin curtains aside I saw that 
it contained nothing written. It contained nothing but 
a figure, an old and worn-looking model made from 
wood or wax, in pale colours. It appeared to be a 
kind of deity or barbaric idol. At first glance it was 
entirely incomprehensible to me. It was a figure that 
really consisted of two ; it had a common back. I 
stared at it for a while, disappointed and surprised.
    </p>
    <p>
     91
    </p>
    <p>
     THB JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     Then I noticed a candle in a metal candlestick fixed 
to the wall of the niche. A match-box lay there. I 
lit the candle and the strange double figure was now 
brightly illuminated.
    </p>
    <p>
     Only slowly did it dawn upon me. Only slowly 
and gradually did I begin to suspect and then per- 
ceive what it was intended to represent. It repre- 
sented a figure which was myself, and this likeness 
of myself was unpleasantly weak and half-real ; it 
had blurred features, and in its whole expression 
there was something unstable, weak, dying or wishing 
to die, and looked rather like a piece of sculpture 
which could be called “ Transitoriness ” or “ Decay,” 
or something similar. On the other hand, the other 
figure which was joined to mine to make one, was 
strong in colour and form, and just as I began to 
realise whom it resembled, namely, the servant and 
President Leo, I discovered a second candle in the wall 
and lit this also. I now saw the double figure repre- 
senting Leo and myself, not only becoming clearer 
and each image more alike, but I also saw that the 
surface of the figures was transparent and that one 
could look inside as one can look through the glass 
of a bottle or vase. Inside the figures I saw some- 
thing moving, slowly, extremely slowly, in the same 
way that a snake moves which has fallen asleep. 
Something was taking place there, something like a 
very slow, smooth but continuous flowing or melting ;
    </p>
    <p>
     92
    </p>
    <p>
     THE JOURNEY TO THE EAST
    </p>
    <p>
     indeed, something melted or poured across from my 
image to that of Leo’s. I perceived that my image 
was in the process of adding to and flowing into 
Leo’s, nourishing and strengthening it. It seemed 
that, in time, all the substance from one image would 
flow into the other and only one would remain : Leo. 
He must grow, I must disappear.
    </p>
    <p>
     As I stood there and looked and tried to under- 
stand what I saw, I recalled a short conversation that 
I had once had with Leo during the festive days at 
Bremgarten. We had talked about the creations of 
poetry being more vivid and real than the poets 
themselves.
    </p>
    <p>
     The candles burned low and went out. I was over- 
come by an infinite weariness and desire to sleep, 
and I turned away to find a place where I could lie 
down and sleep.
    </p>
    <p>
     93
    </p>
   </div>
  </body>
 </text>
</TEI>
